Which factor will most likely cause a person to develop a fever?
Lichens are symbiotic organisms made of green algae and fungi. What do the green algae supply to the fungi in this symbiotic relationship?
When a switch is used in an electrical circuit, the switch can
Which of the following is an example of an assistive device?
Rocks are classified as igneous, metamorphic, or sedimentary according to
A chewable calcium carbonate tablet is a common treatment for stomach discomfort. Calcium carbonate is most likely used as this type of medicine because calcium carbonate
Which two body systems are directly involved in movement?
Which change in the state of water particles causes the particles to become arranged in a fixed position?
Earth's core is primarily composed of which of the following materials?
Which of the following events during meiosis contributes most to the variation within a species?
Which of the following was probably most important in the formation of dark, fertile soil that is good for farming?
When igneous rock is changed into metamorphic rock, which form of energy is this process?
In humans, the digestion process begins in
Which of these items contains only a solution?
Many natural rock formations change color over time. In Utah, for example, iron oxidized and formed red, orange, and yellow rock. Which of the following is the cause of this change?
A population of small, plant-eating beetles lives in a forest. About half of the beetles are light brown and the others are dark green. If years of drought cause the area to become dry with few trees, what would the beetle population most likely look like after several generations?
A scientist wanting to document a change in a river's flow pattern should observe a river over a period of
Automobile engines built today are designed to be gas efficient. Gas-efficient engines most likely affect a city by reducing
A student in an empty classroom shouts, "Hello!" Which best explains what the student hears after the shout?
Which type of energy in gasoline is transformed into mechanical energy in a motorcycle engine?
A student standing near a campfire feels warmer as the fire grows. Which process most likely transfers heat from the campfire to the student?
In snapdragon plants, red flowers are dominant to white flowers. When red-flowered plants are crossed with white-flowered plants, pink flowers are produced. If a researcher wants to produce plants with only white flowers, what color should the parent plants be?
Scientists use the term "light year" to describe
Plate movement can form different features on Earth. The movement of tectonic plates can be both a constructive and a destructive force. At which type of plate boundary is new crust formed?
Which group of organisms can show significant trait changes in the shortest period of time?
Peach trees have sweet-smelling blossoms and produce rich fruit. What is the main purpose of the flowers of a peach tree?
A group of students are researching changes in climate in their region. Which of these would best provide evidence of changes in temperature and rainfall over a period of years?
Which of these would help to prevent infections from occurring in small cuts and scrapes?
Which best describes why winds at the beach change direction between day and night?
Soil erosion can be best prevented by
Which of the following properties provides the BEST way to identify a mineral?
Which sequence represents the order of development for many plants?
When ice cream is left out of a freezer, the ice cream changes from a ___.
Which equipment will best separate a mixture of iron filings and black pepper?
Which characteristic is shared by all cells?
On a small, isolated island, a hurricane destroyed all the trees that produced a large, hard-shelled nut. Which bird population would most likely decrease?
A cow and a frog have similar bone structures in their forelimbs. Both have phalanges, radius, ulna, and humerus bones. However, the cow and frog are animals with very different life cycles from each other. Which most likely describes why the body structures of these animals are so similar?
A cell that is unable to import substances required to process chemical energy is most likely a result of a malfunctioning
Which best describes all unicellular organisms?
When a transverse wave passes from right to left through a medium, what happens to the particles of the medium?
Which characteristic below most likely accounts for our limited knowledge of galaxies?
Decomposers increase the fertility of the soil and prevent dead organisms from building up in the environment. In which way do decomposers make the soil more fertile?
When oxygen combines with hydrogen, which substance is formed?
When plants undergo photosynthesis, a reaction produces sugar, oxygen, and water. During respiration, stored energy from the products of photosynthesis is converted to usable energy. In what form is the energy stored prior to use in respiration?
Which of the following is a typical example of a unicellular organism?
Over geologic time, global mean sea level has varied significantly. Which change is most likely responsible for an increase in global mean sea level?
Which body system is most responsible for the removal of waste?
In which environment is white fur color an advantage for survival?
Which of these will best separate iron filings from sand?
Which of these is the chemical symbol for magnesium?
Which of the following is most likely to lead to error in an experiment?
Which best describes transportation technology?
In a gasoline-powered car, chemical energy from gasoline is transformed to make the car move. The motion of the car is what form of energy?
Which characteristic is affected by interactions with the environment?
Which is the greatest impact humans have had on the carbon cycle?
The floating arrow on a compass always points towards the
Which color shirt will reflect the most light on a hot, sunny day?
A 10 g sample of aluminum and a 10 g sample of iron were each heated by 100 joules of energy. The temperature of the aluminum sample rose 11°C, while the temperature of the iron sample increased 23°C. Which statement best accounts for these results?
If its food supply in a field decreases, the mouse population in that field will probably
Overuse of soil for farming causes local disruptions of several Earth subsystems. Which of these is a part of the biogeochemical cycle that experiences the most severe local disruption?
Which of the following is an example of a physical change but not a chemical change?
While conducting an investigation on refraction, a teacher uses a red laser pointer to show how a beam of light is affected as it passes through several glass objects. The teacher should make sure that the
One student wrote a report about an investigation in which fertilizer was added to tomato plants. Which information from that student's report would most help a second student repeat the investigation?
A student wants to look under a heavy rock. Which simple machine would be BEST to use to lift the rock?
Rust is a compound with the formula Fe_{2}O_{3}. Which elements combine to form rust?
The chemical equation below shows a reaction of copper (Cu) with silver nitrate (AgNO_{3}) yielding silver (Ag) and copper(II) nitrate (Cu(NO_{3})_{2}) Cu + 2AgNO_{3} -> 2Ag + Cu(NO_{3})_{2} Silver and copper(II) nitrate are called the
What role does the centromere play in cellular reproduction?
If 1 kg of the compound toluene melts at -95°C, then 500 g of toluene will
A calculation based on the chemical energy of gasoline shows that a car should be able to go 100 miles on a gallon of fuel. When the car was driven on a test track, the car only went 25 miles on a gallon of fuel. What accounts for most of the difference?
A student wants to find the relationship between the diameter of several plastic disks and the circumference of each disk. Which of these types of graphs should be constructed to determine this relationship?
When light is bounced off a mirror, the light is
Which of the following sentences best explains what happens when puddles evaporate?
Plants on hills keep dirt in place during a rain storm. Plant roots grow into the dirt and keep the dirt from moving. Why do roots grow into the dirt?
In animal skin tissue, cell division is responsible for
Which process drives most of the ATP synthesis in a chloroplast?
Which of the following is most consistent with the modern theory of evolution?
Felicia investigated whether water color affected how fast the water heated in sunlight. She poured tap water into five beakers and placed food coloring in four out of the five beakers. Felicia then used a thermometer to measure the temperature of the water in each of the beakers. Which of these was used as control in her investigation?
One process in the formation of sedimentary rocks is when rocks are
Western coral snakes have a striped color pattern and are poisonous. Arizona mountain king snakes look like western coral snakes but are not poisonous. The color pattern of the Arizona mountain king snake is an example of
Which plant trait is inherited?
A student put 200 milliliters (mL) of water into a pot, sets the pot on a burner, and heats the water to boil. When the pot is taken off the burner, it contains only 180 milliliters (mL) of water. What happened to the rest of the water?
Howie put his plants under a plant light. What was he helping his plants do by providing light?
Which lists the diameter of the planets in order from smallest to largest?
The aloe plant can absorb a lot of water during a rain shower. The extra water is stored in its leaves. The ability to store water in its leaves is most likely an adaptation to which type of environment?
When stratospheric ozone levels are reduced, the amount of ultraviolet radiation hitting Earth increases. Ozone depletion is most often caused
Owen tested a physical property of a mineral. He rubbed a mineral sample on a piece of white tile. The mineral left a red mark on the tile. Which of the following physical properties of the mineral was Owen most likely testing?
Which of these animals has a young form that looks the most like the adult form?
Two tectonic plates pushing toward each other cause intense heat and pressure in Earth's crust. Into which will crust material be changed by heat and pressure?
A student states that plants grow taller when grown in natural light than they do in artificial light. Which method is the best way to determine if the statement is fact or opinion?
Which object is powered by an electrical circuit?
Which concept supports the endosymbiotic origin of complex, eukaryotic double-membrane structures?
Which of these human activities most relies on high-quality soil?
What is an example of a shelter in an ecosystem?
Some areas of the world are experiencing more desert-like conditions. This change most favors survival of species with the ability to do which of the following?
Roger poured water over a pile of sand. Some of the sand washed away. This process is similar to which of the following?
When an earthquake wave passes from the crust to the mantle, the wave
A student wraps a wire around an iron nail. The student then connects the wire to a battery. The nail attracts another nail and they stick together. What force holds the two nails together?
Natural processes cause rapid and slow changes to Earth's surface. Which event causes changes to Earth's surface most rapidly?
Since 1961, Nevada has led the United States in production of which resource?
A class is testing the effect of exercise on heart rate. The heart rate of two students before exercise is compared to their heart rate after running around a track. Which procedure will most likely help the class correctly compare the results of the two students?
Which interaction within an ecosystem is characterized by gradual change from one community of organisms to another?
The continuous changes of a seed to an adult plant that produces seeds is known as a
When someone plays the flute, sound is produced because the air in the flute is
Scientists compared Pluto with other objects in the solar system and found that Pluto is smaller than Earth's moon. This finding caused scientists to question whether Pluto is a planet because
When an iron nail wrapped in a copper wire is attached to a circuit, it forms
Which gas accounts for the largest percentage of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere?
Which human body system attacks viruses and bacteria once they have invaded the body?
The atoms that make up oxygen gas
A student wants to cut a piece of string for a class activity. The length of the string is measured BEST in which units?
If the atomic mass number of an atom is 35, which statement is most accurate?
Biotic components need to be recycled through an ecosystem. Which type of organisms are best able to recycle nutrients back into the ecosystem?
Roger visited his grandfather who lives on a farm. While he was there, he helped his grandfather move hay out of the barn. As Roger worked in the barn he began sneezing. Which system of the body most likely caused Roger to sneeze?
Why should plants be included in investigations about the water cycle?
Which statement best identifies a basic need of all animals?
Which of the following describes an instinctive behavior?
Which of these provide the best evidence that life could develop on Mars?
The primary reason that plants are important for an ecosystem is because they
Energy from the Sun reaches Earth by
Scientists study the current conditions of many solar system objects to gain insight into conditions early in the history of Earth. Which phenomenon most closely models current theories of early Earth?
Jonathan places a pot of water on a stove. As the water boils, how does the state of the water change?
Animal cells obtain energy by
Which illness is associated with a weakened immune system in the body?
In the human kidney, urea from the blood is filtered through the glomerular membrane into a nephron. The movement of urea across this membrane occurs without an input of energy. Which factor is the most likely reason urea absorption does not require energy?
The greatest amount of diversity can be found among which type of organism?
Which energy type is common enough in Nevada to make a significant contribution to the renewable energy needs of the state?
Until recently the Grand Canyon was thought to be about 5-6 million years old. Recently a scientist gathered data and wrote a paper for a scientific journal that indicated the canyon is about 17 million years old. Before this new information about the canyon is accepted, which of these needs to occur?
Which human trait is most likely inherited from a parent?
Foam weather stripping is often placed in the frames of doors and windows in a home. What is the purpose of this weather stripping?
The items listed below were found in a science classroom. * a heart made of plastic with many of its parts labeled * clay formed to look like Earth and other planets * a giant plastic plant cell with removable cell parts These items are all examples of
For a technology project, Kyle came up with an idea to build a model bridge. He wants his bridge to span 50 cm and to support a 1 kg object. According to the engineering design process, which of the following should be Kyle's next step?
Light travels fastest through which of the following?
Different systems of the human body perform different functions. Which system takes oxygen from the air to be moved by the circulatory system?
A solar cell turns sunlight into another form of energy. A solar cell is most like what natural structure?
The Sun appears to move across the sky each day, rising in the east and setting in the west. What causes this apparent motion?
What causes a blue block to appear blue in the sunlight?
A student determined the density of different bars of soap. Which should the student most likely do to check the accuracy of the results?
Which method below would be the best way to determine if an egg, plastic foam, a piece of wood, or a candle would float on water?
Liam lives in the Northern Hemisphere of Earth and plays in the snow in December. His friend lives in the Southern Hemisphere of Earth and plays at the beach in December. What is the best explanation for why this is possible?
A scientist needs to take a picture of the well-ordered arrangements of the atoms and molecules within a substance. Which of the following instruments would be best for the scientist to use?
Gold atoms can be identified based on the number of which subatomic particles?
Which is needed for both boiling and melting to occur?
Which of the following is an example of genetic engineering?
Which of the following is an example of a container that is filled with a pure substance rather than with a mixture?
Which best describes the role of the esophagus in digestion?
Which change is most likely caused by a thunderstorm?
Which is an example of an organism that has been selectively bred for a particular genetic trait?
Which of these can be described as a system of stars, gases, dust, and other matter that orbits a common center of gravity?
The Florida Bog Frog (Lithobates okaloosae) inhabits shallow stream overflows in three counties in Florida. With such a small geographic habitat, any change in the frog's environment could cause drastic changes in the population. Which would most likely affect the frog population if acid rain changed the pH of the water?
Which function do kidneys provide to maintain homeostasis?
While running, leg muscles work to move leg bones, and the skin helps to
Rolanda is growing tomato plants in her garden. She has created a compost pile and has been adding compost around her tomato plants to help fertilize them. Compost is solid waste in which organic material is broken down by microorganisms in the presence of oxygen to where it can be safely stored, handled, and applied to the environment. On what does Rolanda primarily rely in order for composting to work?
Some students were on a tour exploring the inside of a cave. While the students were in the cave, they realized they heard an echo every time that they spoke. Which most likely caused the echo to occur?
A scientist uses angstrom units to measure the distance between two points. The scientist is most likely measuring the distance between two
Based on the evidence available at the time, early models of the solar system stated that all objects in space orbited Earth. In the 16th century, an astronomer reevaluated the evidence and proposed a model of the solar system that is still in use. What part of this model corrected the mistake in previous solar system models?
The hormone insulin is secreted by the pancreas. Which activity is most likely to trigger an increase in the levels of insulin circulating in the blood?
In gym class a student kicks a soccer ball high into the air. As the ball goes upward, which type of energy is increasing?
Which best describes the orbit of the Moon around Earth?
In any physical or chemical process, what two quantities are always conserved?
The nucleus of MOST atoms consists of
The complete removal of decomposers from an ecosystem will have the greatest effect on which of the following?
In an accurate diagram of the solar system, which object would be shown closest to Earth?
Typically, sedimentary rocks are formed
Which renewable resource is used with photovoltaic cells to produce electricity?
Which will most likely happen to a solid substance that is heated?
A scientist observes an unusual activity while studying bacterial cells. Using scientific inquiry to investigate the activity will enable the scientist to
In order to survive, all organisms must have
Which observation of a plant supports the inference that photosynthesis can take place?
To safely conduct an experiment using chemicals, what should students always do?
Infections may be caused by
Which are two parts of the carbon cycle?
The digestive system breaks food into simple substances that the body can use. What system carries these simple substances from the digestive system to other parts of the body?
A student conducts an experiment using a common but potentially harmful bacteria culture. After working with the bacteria, which is the most important safety practice to follow?
Which of these environmental changes goes on for months or years?
Erin placed her shamrock plant in a dark corner. Soon she saw that the leaves had tilted toward her window. What did the plant need most from the window?
Which gravitational pull has the greatest influence on Earth's tides?
One key physical process in beach formation is wave action. Sand is deposited on beaches as waves break onto the shoreline and the energy from the wave scatters. Which type of energy is most used by wave action to modify the shape of the beaches?
A student is asked to bring something that feels rough to class. Which would be BEST for him to bring?
What tool would be used to examine a fingerprint?
Which of the following is a mineral?
During a rainstorm, leaves wash down a gully on a hillside. The water slows down at the foot of the hill and fans out, depositing the leaves. What geologic structure is formed in a similar way?
The change in fur color of the Arctic hare from brown in the summer to white in the winter is an example of
Which sense is used to tell if there is sugar in a glass of tea?
The surface of Earth is covered by a relatively thin layer of water called the
All organisms contain DNA and RNA. What are the subunits of DNA and RNA?
How does ice change the shape of rocks?
Which property of Earth's interior keeps the innermost part in a solid state?
Diseases that can be transmitted between organisms are
The transfer of thermal energy from one object to another is known as
Which part of the body carries out the function of copying DNA?
The atomic mass of an atom is
Different species of carnivorous animals that share the same habitat in an ecosystem may
Which scientist is best known for studying plants and animals?
Green plants get the energy they need to make food from
The movement of soil by wind or water is called
Arctic areas are covered with snow and ice for much of the year. Which color rabbits would be safest from foxes there?
The ratio of an object's mass to its volume is its
As the hawk population increases in an ecosystem, the deer mouse population will most likely decrease as a result of
Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere trap heat near Earth's surface. Which of these is a greenhouse gas?
What happens during photosynthesis?
Which is an example of a chemical reaction?
A baby kit fox grows to become an adult with a mass of over 3.5 kg. What factor will have the greatest influence on this kit fox's survival?
Hydrochloric acid is added to a beaker containing a piece of zinc. As a result, zinc chloride is formed and hydrogen gas is released. This is an example of
Which part of a plant produces the seeds?
Which of the following is found in all living organisms?
What is the role of decomposers in a food chain?
Copernicus changed the way people viewed the solar system by
Which part of the electromagnetic spectrum can humans sense without using equipment or technology?
The nervous system is composed of cells, tissues, and organs. Which is a cell of the nervous system?
A shallow container of salt water is placed in sunlight for a day. Which is the most likely result?
Which of these will best separate a saltwater solution?
Mrs. Henderson's class has five small, covered boxes. One contains perfume; another contains dried onions. There is also a box of pine needles, a box of lemon pieces, and a box with a paper towel wet with vanilla flavoring. Which should they do to get the best information about what is in each box?
Which features are physical properties of an iron nail?
Which item would a magnet attract?
Which human activity is most harmful to the natural environment?
The process of digestion breaks down proteins into smaller molecules that are used to rebuild other proteins. During digestion, proteins undergo
Blood is composed of different cell types that transport nutrients and wastes throughout the body. Because of this, blood is classified as
What should a student do when a glass beaker shatters during a laboratory experiment?
An astronomical unit (AU) refers to the distance between
An organ pipe produces a musical note same number of nitrogen gas molecules. with a wavelength of 2.72 m. What is the frequency of this note if the speed of sound is 348 m/s?
Which of the following allows the planets to stay in orbit?
Which of these involves the formation of a new chemical substance?
Water causes weathering when it
Which of these statements about nonrenewable resources is true?
Which statement best identifies a living thing that depends on another living thing to survive?
A student is playing with a small toy boat on a pond. The student throws a rock in the pond. This creates waves that move the boat toward the shore. The boat moves toward the shore because the waves transfer
A geologist finds a layer of shale near the surface from a certain time period. Nearby, the geologist finds the same layer of shale, but it is deeper underground than the first layer. What might have caused the difference in the depth of the shale layer?
The pull of gravity on Earth is caused by
In which type of rock are fossils generally found?
Structural geologists study rock formations to determine the type of environment in which the rocks formed and the events that shaped the rocks. Paleontologists study fossils found in rock formations. Scientists in both these fields have a common interest in discovering the
A simple machine that helps move a flag up a flagpole is
Which cellular structure allows nutrients to pass into cells?
An example of a renewable resource is
Minerals are formed by which process?
Which of these best defines the term "pollutant"?
The periodic table of the elements is systematically organized according to the
Which human body system produces the hormones that regulate growth?
Repeated exposure to extremely loud sounds can reduce hearing ability by direct damage to which structures?
What does a mirror do to light that causes objects to appear backwards?
The formation of the mineral halite is most likely to occur by which process?
A student wants to design an experiment regarding the behavior of crickets. Which is the best question to ask to begin the experiment?
Decomposers are organisms that eat and break down dead plant and animal material. Which organism is a decomposer?
An area received six inches of snow during the winter. Before the snow can continue through the water cycle as ground water or runoff, it must first ___.
New vaccines for diseases are being developed all the time. How do vaccines most likely help people?
The cell cycle describes the processes that take place as a cell
A company that makes fences started using a new material instead of wood. The new material will last longer than wood. What is the most likely benefit of the new material?
Which best explains how the Appalachian Mountains formed?
Which is a source of sound?
Which natural material is best for making a table?
A class is studying textures and collects several samples. Which of these items would the students most likely use magnification to study?
Over several years, a scientist successfully isolates a species of flower for white color. This year, when the new generation of flowers blooms, one yellow flower is found in the population. Which is the best reason for the appearance of a new flower color within the species?
What type of precipitation occurs when raindrops freeze as they fall?
In the atomic model that includes a nucleus, the positive charge is
A student used two long wires to connect a lightbulb to a battery. The student noticed that as soon as the circuit was complete, a nearby compass started to point in a direction other than north. The compass pointed in a different direction because it was reacting to the
The production of sweat is typically a response to an increase in the body's
Which of the following converts electrical energy into motion?
What happens at the boiling point of a substance?
How do producers get energy?
In an investigation, a student wants to see how a ball is affected by rolling it over a surface covered with sandpaper. In preparation for the trial, the student makes a list of the possible conditions that could affect the investigation. The student is most likely listing the
If two organisms are classified in different orders but are in the same class, which of these statements is true?
Why do mountain climbers at high elevations use oxygen tanks to help them breathe?
The students were told that the net applied force from the engine was the same for each vehicle tested. Based on this information, which vehicle had the greatest acceleration (a = F/m)?
Which metric unit is used to describe an object's length?
Which is a process that occurs during photosynthesis?
The work of which scientist serves as the basis for many procedures used in agriculture, such as selective breeding of plants?
A student is investigating which type of soil is best for growing tomato plants from seeds. The student plants four tomato seeds in each of three different containers of soil. Which step of the procedure would help the student get the most reliable results?
In many caves, rock formations include stalactites and stalagmites. Where does the rock in these formations come from?
A person named Leonardo da Vinci studied many things including animals, geology, clouds, and flight. His study of birds helped him design the first parachute. Everything he saw made him ask how and why. Which human quality most likely made this person want to study many different things?
What is the main reason we can see the Moon?
Which of these events have the most influence on regional climate?
If a scientist wants the medical community to revise old information and use new research findings in the treatment of a disease, it would be best to present the information
David planted ten corn seeds in sandy soil and ten corn seeds in clay soil. He kept both groups of plants at room temperature, gave them the same amount of water, and placed them all in the same sunny room. Which of the following questions is David most able to answer with his experiment?
Which geologic feature most likely forms when an oceanic tectonic plate is slowly subducted beneath a continental tectonic plate?
A glacier retreats leaving bare rocks. Lichens begin to live on the rocks. The lichens produce an acid that starts to break down the rocks. How will this process affect the environment?
During protein synthesis, mRNA is translated into three-base sequences representing amino acids. What signals the ribosome to begin translating the mRNA into a new amino acid sequence?
Phobos is one of two large objects that orbit the planet Mars. Because Phobos orbits Mars, Phobos should be classified as which type of body?
Water at 20°C in an uncovered pan is evaporating very slowly. What could be done to the water to make it evaporate more quickly?
Which rapid changes are caused by heat from inside Earth?
Which tool is most responsible for preventing future pandemics of smallpox?
After which event will ecological succession most likely happen?
Sir Isaac Newton determined that white light is made up of all the colors of the rainbow. What did he use to discover this phenomenon?
Which characteristic is most common among animals living in a cold climate?
Species are classified based on their characteristics. Which characteristic identifies two organisms as members of one species? The organisms
A student hypothesizes that the amount of water a plant receives will affect how long it grows before reaching maturity. To test this hypothesis, the student will need
One example of matter is
If a classroom experiment involves the use of several unidentified chemical solutions, which factor would be most important in maintaining safety during the experiment?
Vein deposits of gold and silver are often formed in areas that have experienced which geologic process?
Cells that conduct messages are known as
The boiling of water results in a physical change in matter from
What do playing a guitar, banging a drum, and dropping a pebble in the water have in common?
Which object below is gaining stored energy?
At room temperature, what state of matter is copper?
All of the following events occur during prophase in mitosis except
A seed of a plant sticks to the fur of an animal as it walks by. How has the animal most likely helped the plant?
Which part of a plant is used to absorb sunlight during photosynthesis?
You wish to closely observe a small insect. Which tool is the best to use?
The interaction of the skeletal and muscular systems to produce locomotion is coordinated by which human body system?
A student flips a coin four times. It lands "heads" up three times. The student concludes that the coin will land "heads" up three times out of four. What will make the conclusion more accurate?
Which mineral has six-sided transparent crystals that will scratch glass?
Which best describes a proton?
The difference between the atomic number of an element and the element's atomic mass is the number of
Which step will most likely ensure that the results of an investigation are valid?
What is formed when a sodium atom and chlorine atom react chemically?
Which of these is an example of an endothermic process?
The distance from Earth to the Sun is about 150,000,000 km. What abbreviation do scientists use to describe this distance?
In New York State, the longest period of daylight occurs during which month?
Which trait does a puppy inherit from its parents?
Which material is most easily recycled at school?
Plants make sugars in the presence of sunlight in a process called photosynthesis. What form of carbon do the plants take in for this process?
The sun is a star of average size and brightness. From Earth, the sun appears as a round, yellow object in the daytime sky. At night, we see other stars. They appear as tiny points of light. Why does the sun appear larger than stars that we see at night?
A drain cleaner consists of sodium hydroxide and aluminum. When the drain cleaner is added to water, bubbles of hydrogen are produced, and the solution becomes very hot. Which of these best describes what happens to form the bubbles when the cleaner is added to water? F
John has diabetes. Which of the following should he be careful about eating or drinking?
Within a substance, atoms that collide frequently and move independently of one another are most likely in a
Which object best reflects light?
The gravitational attraction of the Moon causes which effect on Earth?
A forest was cleared for the building of a resort, but before construction began, secondary succession set in. Which of these describes why secondary succession appeared so rapidly?
Which object is made to reflect light?
A car may produce many forms of energy from the fuel it uses. Which indicates that a car does not use fuel with 100% efficiency?
After nitrogen becomes part of the lithosphere, what is the next change that nitrogen will undergo?
Which of the following would be more likely to pollute a river?
For two organisms to be classified as the same species, they must produce offspring that are
Which sentence best describes the organization of the heart?
Which stage in the reptile life cycle is most like the birth of a lion cub?
What would be the best way to determine the role of squirrels in a forest ecosystem?
Which of the following systems breaks food into nutrients that can be used by the body?
Barry collected four different rocks. The rock with the GREATEST mass will feel the ___.
Which of the following is not an inherited trait of humans?
When a person chews, saliva from the mouth mixes with starches in food. These starches begin to turn into sugars. Changing starches into sugars is best described as
Which of these renewable resources results in an increase in pollution when used to produce energy?
Granite is an igneous rock. Which of these describes what usually happens to granite after it is weathered, broken into small particles, buried deep underground, and compacted?
The features below are all present on Earth. Which feature could also be found on the Moon?
What is the highest temperature that water can reach in a pot on a stove?
In 2004 the Hubble space telescope captured images of distant star clusters, each containing about a million stars. These star clusters were most likely part of which structure?
Where is most of the mass of the atom located?
Which situation is the best example of ecological succession?
The BEST way to tell the DIFFERENCE between an oak and a maple tree is to compare the
Which example describes a learned behavior in a dog?
In a lab investigation, a student notes that two metal blocks have the same mass. Based on this observation, if the two blocks were put on opposite sides of a balance, they would best represent
A scientist was investigating why several fish caught from a local stream displayed similar mutations. He found that the water temperature of the stream was elevated since an industrial plant began discharging heated water into the stream. The scientist concluded that increased water temperature during the egg phase led to the mutation in the fish. According to this conclusion, the mutation was caused by
Solar radiation has a part in the water cycle by
A student sets a block at the top of a wooden ramp. The student pushes the block. As the block slides down the ramp, it slows down and then comes to a stop. What force causes the block to slow down?
Which of these explains how a trench can form?
Pepsin is an enzyme that acts in the stomach for protein digestion. Which of these is most likely the main role of pepsin in this metabolic reaction?
Sodium chloride, commonly called "table salt," is made up of sodium and chlorine that have been combined chemically. Which term best describes sodium chloride?
Katia was listening to music on the radio. In order for the sound to be produced, the electrical energy must be converted into which type of energy?
Studies of snail fossils in Egypt indicate that areas of Egypt that are now desert were once thriving savannahs approximately 130,000 years ago. What does the presence of these fossils indicate about the area of Egypt that was thriving 130,000 years ago?
Which statement identifies an energy source as renewable?
A wet towel will dry when it is left in the Sun. Which process occurs to make this happen?
Otto pushed a toy car across a floor. The car traveled fast across the wood, but it slowed to a stop on the carpet. Which best explains what happened when the car reached the carpet?
Eye color is a physical trait. Which statement best explains why a child has a specific eye color?
Manganese has an atomic number of 25 and an atomic mass of 55 amu. How many particles are found in its nucleus?
Students researched monkeys at a zoo. They recorded the monkeys' traits and behaviors. This investigation activity is best described as
The fur of an arctic fox turns from brown to white as winter approaches. This is an example of
Which is an example of a chemical change?
Which statement is describing climate?
Scientists have categorized trees based on whether they keep or lose their leaves each year. Another logical way to categorize trees is based on the
Which resource is considered nonrenewable?
Sand and iron particles that are similar in size and color are mixed together in a beaker. What would be the best method of separating the particles?
Which habitat on Earth would probably 28 add the greatest amount of water to the water cycle through evaporation?
Which of these actions will change a sedimentary rock, such as limestone, into a metamorphic rock, such as marble?
A loaf of bread is baking in a pan in a 350° F oven. What would cause a burn to a hand the quickest because of its low specific heat?
A student poured some sugar into a glass of water. After the water was stirred, no solid sugar remained in the glass. Which statement best describes what happened?
The magnitude of the gravitational force between two planets depends on the
The fossils that are found in the oldest layers of sedimentary rock were formed which types of organisms?
A snail's shell provides the snail with
Since green plants make their own food, they are called
Which metalloid is used in solar cells and computer chips?
The best evidence that two land areas were once connected is the discovery that both land masses
Rachel purchased a kit for making a skateboard ramp. Which of the following is most important to have for putting the ramp together?
What is the smallest particle of the element gold (Au) that can still be classified as gold?
Which best describes the function of the small intestine?
A forest is flooded when a natural dam breaks, leaving the forest floor under two meters of water. Which animal is most affected by the flooding?
Which object will most likely be attracted to a magnet?
At what temperature does pure water boil?
Animals that eat both plant matter and meat are referred to as
Corals are animals that live in tropical oceans. Fossils of corals are found in Ohio. What does the presence of coral fossils suggest about how the environment of Ohio has changed over time?
Alex looked at an electric toothbrush that had a plug with three metal prongs. Why are these prongs made out of metal?
Where is an igneous rock such as pumice most likely formed?
Why are many telescopes used far from cities?
Where do plants get energy from to make food?
Which of the following is most likely to cause water to change from one state of matter to another state of matter?
When a soccer player kicks a ball, which two systems work directly with the muscular system?
Which two activities are carried out by all species of living things?
Which best explains why a person infected with bacteria may have a fever?
Most of the concentration of which gas results from the activity of producer organisms?
What is determined by the speed that Earth rotates on its axis?
The spectrum of visible light can be seen in a rainbow because white light is
Kate sees a full moon. About how much time will go by before the next full moon?
The sediments found in a riverbed are most likely a result of which action on nearby rock?
The most common way humans contribute to the extinction of organisms is by
Which of the following is an example of matter changing state?
A car runs out of fuel while traveling on a level road and eventually comes to a stop. Which of the following best explains why the car stops?
Which of the following best represents one particular stage in a life cycle?
Which process of the water cycle transports water from plants to clouds?
Sulfur scrubbers are devices installed in coal-fired power plants. Sulfur scrubbers reduce the emission of sulfur dioxide. What environmental problem are sulfur scrubbers most likely trying to address?
Which system of the human body provides protection to most of the major organs?
A scientist developed a model that described the actions of DNA in the cell nuclei, which helped explain how traits were inherited. Which scientist helped develop this model?
Which item is designed to change electrical energy into heat energy?
Which characteristic is the best example of an inherited trait?
Which correctly arranges three scientific terms-theory, law, and hypothesis-from least to most accepted or tested?
The metal lid on a glass jar is hard to open, so it is held under warm, running water. What causes the jar to open easily after it was held under the water?
A dung beetle is an insect that gathers waste from animals, rolls it into a compact ball, lays eggs in it, and buries it in the soil. This gives the eggs a warm, safe place to hatch and provides a food source for the developing larvae. Which impact does the dung beetle most likely have on its ecosystem?
After playing outside on a cold day, Jaime went inside to wash his hands. Although the water was normal temperature, he noticed that it felt warmer than usual. What would explain this phenomenon?
What is the relationship between tissues and organs?
What will be the most likely result for some species of animals with the continued burning of rain forests in Africa?
Earthworms live underground in the soil. As they move through the soil, they create tunnels. The tunnels help improve the soil. Plants grow better in soil that has earthworms. Which statement explains how earthworm tunnels help plants?
Which tools are best used to determine the speed of a turtle as it walks along a path?
Which tool would a student use to measure wind speed?
Why would explorers use a compass when traveling to unknown lands?
Which measurement tool is used to find the volume of a small piece of granite?
What form of energy causes an ice cube to melt?
Which characteristic is most beneficial for an animal living on a snowy mountain?
Which of the following is a property of CO2 gas?
Which rapid changes can be caused by storms?
Which is an example of a chemical reaction?
Which unit of measurement can be used to describe the length of a desk?
The incompleteness of the fossil record results primarily from which phenomenon?
A student conducts an investigation. In order to make a valid conclusion, she must
The bonding of oxygen to red blood cells is important to the body because it enables the body to
Some of Earth's water is stored underground in porous rock formations known as aquifers. Which of these could use up groundwater in aquifers?
All plants and animals have mechanisms that
Which is the best tool to measure the angles of a triangular object?
All living organisms are dependent on plants because plants
Compared to other stars in our galaxy, which is the best description of our Sun?
While studying the relationship between number of trees and amount of atmospheric oxygen, which of the following would be most important to take into account?
A student is working on a science project display for the school science fair. To best communicate why her conclusions are valid, what should be included on the display?
Which of the following describes asexual reproduction?
Which scientist is known for his genetics experiments with pea plants?
On a cold, cloudy day, the local weather forecaster predicts that a high-pressure system will be moving into the area in the next 24 hours. Which weather conditions will this system most likely bring to the area?
What determines if twins are identical?
Which of these processes is a conversion made by solar panels?
In fruit flies, red eyes are dominant over sepia eyes. A male with red eyes is crossed with a female with sepia eyes producing first generation offspring that all had sepia eyes. What does this indicate about the flies that were crossed?
Acid rain caused by industrial pollution greatly reduces the number of trees in a forested region that is home to a particular species of bird. How might this decrease in the number of trees most likely affect this bird population?
Which of these is the main function of a cell wall?
Which sentence about the periodic table of elements is true?
Salt concentration, water temperature, plankton, and the whale shark might all be used in a description of an ocean
Rocks can be classified many different ways, including as igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary. This classification is based on the
A mountain range has hills around its edges. How are the mountains and hills alike?
Human muscle cells need nutrients and oxygen during exercise. The human body is able to meet the needs of the muscle cells during exercise by increasing
Phyllis investigated what happened when she added some different substances to water. Which substance can combine with water to form a solution?
Fossil fuels are considered a nonrenewable resource because they
A student is growing some plants for an experiment. She notices small white spots on the leaves. Which tool should she use to get a better look at the spots?
Why are seals able to live off the coast of Antarctica while frogs, snakes, and panthers are not?
How are the functions of a carbohydrate and a lipid similar?
Traveling in opposite directions, buses A and B are passing each other at the relative speed of 25 km/h, while a passenger on bus A walks toward the back of the bus at the speed of 5 km/h. What is the velocity of the passenger on bus A relative to bus B?
A student drops a ball. Which force causes the ball to fall to the ground?
Hydrogen is located on the left side of the periodic table in the same column as the alkali metals, but it has characteristics of a nonmetal. Which of the following is a physical property of hydrogen?
In an experiment, a scientist named Pavlov rang a bell before he fed his dogs, which made the dogs drool. Soon the dogs would drool when they heard the bell, even if they did not receive any food. What type of response did the dogs exhibit?
Which invention will best help people travel quickly to far away places?
What is an environmental threat posed by oil and gas acquisition and transport that is not posed by the acquisition and transport of the energy resources uranium, and wood?
Some plant species are more tolerant of acidic soil than others. The tolerant species are favored in areas affected by which consequence of human activity?
Which resource has the most potential for production of renewable electric energy?
A layer of solid brittle rock comprises the outer 100 kilometers of Earth. This layer, which contains both the crust and the upper mantle, is called the
During its lifetime, which object is known to change in brightness, color, and temperature?
What causes a free falling object to accelerate?
What is the main source of energy that drives all weather patterns?
What is one factor that contributes to seasons occurring in New York State?
Which cell part is correctly paired with its function?
A meeting of scientists, called a symposium, occurs every year to share recent research about the atmosphere of Earth. This symposium mainly serves which purpose in science?
A wind turbine primarily uses which type of energy?
A rubber band will make a sound when it is
What would a warm air mass over the ocean most likely cause?
The Moon is visible to observers on Earth because of
Which illness is always caused by an infection?
Jonny climbed an apple tree. How are Jonny and the apple tree similar to each other?
What are the names of the products in the chemical equation shown below? HCl + NaHCO_{3} -> NaCl + CO_{2} + H_{2}O
A ball is tossed up in the air and it comes back down. The ball comes back down because of
Timber companies can best manage the number of trees in forests by
The formation of the Himalayan Mountains is one example of land features caused by compressive forces. Which action most likely led to the formation of these mountains?
What abiotic factor would most likely signal a population of birds that it is time to migrate from north to south?
A greenhouse is used as a model of the atmosphere. Which of the following cannot be demonstrated by the model?
A light bulb manufacturer claims its light bulb is "twice as bright" per unit of electrical energy consumed as the leading light bulb. If this claim is correct, what factor must be accurately compared between the two bulbs?
In the 17th century, Gregor Mendel crossed pea plants with different traits and observed the results in their offspring. To which of these did Mendel contribute most directly with his work?
How does the appearance of a constellation change during the night?
The freezing and thawing action of water affects a rock by
Delilah put a container of water in the freezer and left it there overnight. The next morning she saw that the water in the container had changed to ice. Which of the following statements best explains why the water changed to ice?
Earth's rotation (turning on its axis) causes
Which of the following climates has cold winters and hot summers?
What form of energy is being used when a person pushes a wooden block across the floor?
Which action is an example of good water management?
An Earth year is the length of time it takes for
Which land form results when carbonic acid in groundwater seeps through rock and dissolves limestone?
Which part of a DNA molecule represents encoded information?
Early scientists most likely saw a discharge of electricity for the first time when observing a
In humans, the amount of sugar in blood is controlled by the release of a hormone called insulin. This process is an example of
It is necessary to add a day to the calendar every four years because
Which tool would be best to measure the length of a butterfly?
Scientists invented a liquid that removes grease and keeps the skin soft. How could this discovery most likely be used?
The first step in the water cycle is evaporation. What gives water the energy to evaporate?
On a warm sunny afternoon, ocean water splashed onto a rock. A short time later, the rock was dry. Which statement best explains what happened to the water on the rock?
Which is a nonrenewable natural resource that is used to make electrical energy?
Which process initiates the passage of half of a parent's DNA to offspring?
Which resource provides the minerals plants need to grow?
At what time on a sunny day will the shadow of the school's flagpole be the shortest?
Animals get energy for growth and repair from
A flower produces seeds that fall to the ground and grow into new plants that produce more flowers. The seeds begin to grow by the process of
A rock has most likely traveled a long distance from its place of origin if it is
Which of the following best explains why the tectonic plates of Earth move?
Over a long period of time, a rocky volcanic island that previously did not support any form of life got transformed into a dense forested region. Which of these species is most likely to have been the pioneer species that initiated this transformation?
The formation of coal deposits occurred over millions of years. Which feature was most responsible for these deposits?
A teacher is performing a demonstration about static electricity for his class by rubbing a balloon against a wool sweater. The balloon sticks to the wool sweater. Which particles are exchanged during the demonstration?
After a race, a newspaper lists the names of the five fastest runners. Another method that could be used to identify the five fastest runners is to make a chart that shows the
A scientist plans to investigate the nervous system of sea slugs. What should the scientist do first?
Natural selection is a mechanism that acts on individuals within a population. Which is a result of the process of natural selection?
What chemical symbol represents the element iron?
A push or a pull on an object is an example of
Which statement is a description of weather?
Clouds and precipitation moved across western Massachusetts one evening. The temperature changed from 41°F to 28°F. Which of the following changes in precipitation most likely occurred on this evening?
The human body has an average, normal temperature of about 98.6ºF. To keep the core body temperature from becoming too high, the brain sends a signal to the body to
Why is water considered to be a renewable resource?
What is the most prominent land feature formed by the convergence of the Indo-Australian and Eurasian plates?
To which group does an animal belong if it lays eggs and has scales and gills?
What causes nighttime and daytime on Earth?
Which area is coldest?
Which scientist is credited with using a telescope in the seventeenth century to discover the moons of Jupiter?
Which of these is a freshwater reservoir?
In eukaryotic organisms, microtubules give cells structure, and microfilaments help the cell contract and move. Together, they combine to perform functions similar to what two human body systems?
Which kind of rock is produced by deposition and cementation?
Which characteristic is inherited rather than learned?
Which biological process in mammals occurs largely due to cell division?
Frame construction predominates in the New England area due to the abundance of
Which of these properties of water helps moderate the weather of coastal areas?
Birds eat non-camouflaged moths at a higher rate than they eat camouflaged moths. In which situation would birds eat the moths at the slowest rate?
During which process does a caterpillar become a butterfly?
Gregor Mendel cross-pollinated red and white snapdragon flowers. What information indicates that incomplete dominance was achieved?
What is the major function of the human excretory system?
Yumiko gave some reasons why kettles and kitchen pans are often made of copper. Which reason is correct?
In most animals, combinations of various tissues make up functional units called
How do the spines of a cactus help it survive?
Water enters a plant cell through the
People are developing electric cars that would replace gasoline-burning cars. One major advantage of the electric car is that it
Which group of organisms would all be found living in a tropical rain forest?
Which SI unit would be most appropriate for recording the length of a typical classroom?
If two objects are two meters apart, which of these changes will increase the gravitational force between the two objects?
Which of these cell structures converts nutrients to energy for cell functions?
Cumulonimbus clouds often form along cold fronts. Which type of weather is most likely to occur along a cold front?
An eagle is a bird that reproduces by laying its eggs in a dry nest. Which animal lays its eggs in a place most similar to the eagle?
The chemical formula for water is H_{2}O. What does the formula show about each element in the compound?
How far from Earth is an object that is 10 light years from Earth?
The oceans most influence global climate by
A science class investigated the percentage of corn kernels that pop in bags of different brands of popcorn. Fifteen students tested three brands of popcorn each and reported their results to the class. Why did the teacher most likely have so many students report the results?
The smallest part of an element that retains the properties of the element is the
What is the composition of the nucleus of an atom?
Which of these would best be shown as a 3-D model?
A root emerges from a seed because of the force of
Which of these is the BEST reason to study weather?
A recycling plant manager needs to melt 1500 kg of scrap copper to sell to a wire manufacturer. The copper is at 15°C and its melting point is 1083°C. The copper has a specific heat of 385 J/kg x K. How much heat is required to raise the temperature of the copper to its melting point?
A decomposer is an organism that
Which type of scientist would study the relationship between simple machines and energy?
The seeds of an oak come from the ___.
A manufacturer wants to produce a container for food storage that does not break easily and is airtight, inexpensive, and microwave-safe. Which of the following is the best material to use to make the container?
When carbon and oxygen combine chemically, the mass of the product is
Juvenile diabetes is a disease caused by the body's inability to create insulin. The body's white blood cells attack the pancreatic cells that produce insulin. This type of disease is known as
Which of these describes a property of all matter?
Which of the following is a characteristic of all chemical changes?
What is the complementary base of adenine in DNA?
What is the density of a 64-g iron cube that displaces 8 mL of water?
What keeps Mars in orbit around the Sun?
Which material is primarily a mixture of weathered rock and organic matter?
How do plants most commonly break large rocks into smaller pieces?
Which statement best describes the climate of Nevada?
What is the primary function of skin cells?
Some plants grow only in specific places in the world. Some cacti, for example, grow only in deserts. Which of the following is most important in determining where a plant can grow and survive?
A geologist found fossils of horse bones in different rock layers of a canyon. The fossils in the lower levels show shorter bones than those in the upper-level fossils. Which conclusion is based on the geologist's observations?
Which of the following is a reason life in the outermost planets is less likely than life on planets nearer the Sun?
Which statement best explains how periods on the periodic table are organized?
Nonrenewable sources of energy have limited supplies. Researchers are developing devices that will make renewable energy more available. Which is a source of renewable energy?
Which of these living things in a grassland ecosystem depend on the presence of a variety of bacteria and other microorganisms in the soil?
An ecosystem is a community of organisms interacting with their physical environment. Why are decomposers an important part of ecosystems?
Which term identifies a group of cells that work together to perform a similar function?
Which of these statements is not considered part of the Big Bang Theory?
Cells in the body use oxygen (O2) for cellular respiration. Which is the result of cellular respiration?
Which geologic process is absent from the Gulf Coast states?
The human body gets the energy it needs for growth and repair directly from
In what type of rock would a geologist most likely find evidence of ancient life?
During the Apollo 14 moon landing, astronauts played golf on the moon. Which of the following would be less on the moon than on Earth?
Evaporation, condensation, and precipitation are all processes which occur in the
Directions Read the information about wind erosion then answer the question. Wind can cause erosion that changes the surface of the Earth. Wind erosion can have negative effects on the environment by removing soil and polluting the air during dust storms. Walter wanted to find out if faster wind speeds increased the amount of wind erosion. Which instrument should he use to measure wind speed?
Where does oxygen-rich blood go after leaving the lungs?
Chemical pesticides are sometimes sprayed on crops to kill insects that eat the crops. People have different viewpoints about the use of pesticides on crops. What might be a concern about using pesticides on the crops?
The number of fish in a lake suddenly increases. How will the increase most likely affect the lake?
Which statement correctly describes a relationship between two human body systems?
Which statement best explains Earth's day and night cycle?
What is the first thing a student should do if an accident happens during a science experiment?
Which of the following helps keep the Moon in its orbit?
Which process allows green plants to control the amount of water stored in their leaves?
What is a job of white blood cells?
Which is an example of kinetic energy?
A new mutation that occurs in which type of cell can be passed on to offspring?
When too much salt is detected in the bloodstream, the brain secretes a hormone that helps the body retain water by reducing the amount of urine produced. This is an example of
Which of these is a safe practice in a laboratory investigation when working with chemicals?
Which change in the environment would have a negative effect on the survival of a species in an ecosystem?
An element is identified by
Which of these dissolve in water?
What is the main function of a plant stem?
Naturally occurring variations within a species are mainly the result of mutations and
As a sample of water turns to ice,
An ice cube is placed in a pan. The pan is placed over an open flame. Which change will most likely happen over time?
Byron is investigating how temperature affects mold growth on bread. Before starting his procedure, Byron states in his journal that he thinks wet bread placed in the refrigerator will grow the most mold. Which term best describes Byron's statement?
The telephone was invented in Boston by
Which characteristic can an amoeba change that a paramecium cannot change?
A metal spoon was left in a pot of boiling soup. The cook burned a finger by touching the spoon. Why did the finger get burned?
Light rays are focused by the lens of a camera through the process of
Which of these provides the best evidence that the distribution of Earth's oceans has changed over time?
Which change would have the greatest negative impact on the survival of an owl species?
Which organ removes cell waste from the blood?
According to the Big Bang Theory, how is the universe changing?
Light enters the human eye through the
The stages in the life cycle of an organism are shown below. birth -> growth -> development -> reproduction -> death In which life cycle stage will a new organism be made?
Baby chicks peck their way out of their shells when they hatch. This activity is an example of which of the following types of behavior?
Which conclusion can be made about earthworms because they do not have an internal skeleton?
The smallest unit of a plant that can perform all of the processes of life is the
Soda water is a liquid that has bubbles of carbon dioxide in it. Which term best describes soda water?
All stars start forming in the same manner. Some follow the life cycle of the Sun, while others turn into neutron stars or black holes. Which property determines the fate of a star as it develops?
If a neutral atom loses an electron, what is formed?
A student mixed baking soda with vinegar and observed that the reaction was endothermic. When is a reaction endothermic?
What is the primary energy source that drives all weather events, including precipitation, hurricanes, and tornados?
Which system absorbs and carries food from the digestive system to the rest of the body?
Why do planets stay in orbit around the Sun?
Earth rotates on its north-south axis. Which statement best describes one complete rotation?
A rock sample will most likely contain
A jet plane is moving at a constant velocity on a flat surface. Which forces act against the forward motion of the plane?
Atmospheric greenhouse gases help heat the atmosphere by
Scurvy is a disease that sailors often got on long voyages. It was discovered that scurvy could be prevented by eating oranges and lemons. This suggests that scurvy is a disease caused by
Runoff from farms that use fertilizers is entering a small lake. This will most directly affect the lake by causing
Why is protein an important part of a healthy diet?
An atom will always have
Students on two different school campuses are comparing the growth rate of grass three weeks after fertilizer has been applied. The same fertilizer and the same amount of water are used on both campuses. Which additional variable is most important to control when the results of the two investigations are compared?
A caterpillar changing into a butterfly is an example of
Some immune cells are actively involved in ingesting, destroying, and presenting invading microbial antigens on their surface to stimulate other cells to produce antibodies. Which of these cells is responsible for initiating such an immune response?
A single prokaryotic cell can divide several times in an hour. Few eukaryotic cells can divide as quickly. Which of the following statements best explains this difference?
Which biological process determines the probability that particular alleles will be found in any given gamete?
When a person speaks into a telephone, sound energy is changed mostly into which form of energy?
In the human body, what part of the central nervous system connects with other nerves outside of the central nervous system?
Photovoltaic cells capture photons of sunlight and transform them directly into electricity. Many of Earth's other energy resources are simply transformed solar energy. Which two energy resources store energy that did not begin as solar energy?
What determines how long the Moon takes to complete one cycle of phases?
Oxygen reacts with iron to produce rust and with hydrogen to produce water. Which statement describes both reactions?
What is the primary job of red blood cells?
What kingdom contains organisms that are multicellular, have no chlorophyll, and absorb nutrients from decaying tissue?
A salvage yard contains a mixture of iron, glass, aluminum, and plastic. Which property of iron does the salvage yard take advantage of when separating the iron from the rest of the materials?
While a sailor was out fishing, he got lost at sea. Which object would help him direct the boat back to shore?
Water is a very important part of the physical weathering of rock. Which of these properties of water is most important in causing some of the physical weathering of rock?
A student uses a telescope to view stars at night. The student notices some of the stars are different colors. The color of a star is determined most by its
Which function is performed at similarly structured sites in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?
Which material is the best natural resource to use for making water-resistant shoes?
When hunting by humans causes a species to become extinct, this may produce damaging effects throughout the ecosystem of the extinct species. What is the cause of this damage?
Sarah's class is learning about mixtures and solutions. Her teacher writes four statements on the board. Which statement best describes a mixture?
Which of the following best explains why the Sun appears to move across the sky every day?
The theory of spontaneous generation was eventually disproved scientifically by
Discarded electronic devices, such as outdated computers and cell phones, contain materials that can be toxic to the environment. Which statement best explains why humans continue to use these technologies?
A student crumples up a sheet of paper. Which property of the paper has changed?
When a plant dies, it often decomposes and becomes part of the soil. This process is one step in which cycle?
Which would best aid a scientist in discovering how Earth may have changed over time?
Kendall studied the ways in which human body systems work together. He compared the respiratory and circulatory systems. In which way are these two systems similar to each other?
A difference between the oceanic crust and the continental crust is that the oceanic crust is
Which of these elements is found in the greatest amount in organisms?
After mining removes layers of rock from a hillside, new plants begin to grow in the cracks of the bare rock. The plants beginning to grow are an example of which natural process?
Improvements in farming technology would most likely
In a container, a mixture of water and salt is stirred so that the salt dissolves completely. Sand is added to this solution and allowed to settle to the bottom of the container. If the container is placed on a heat source and the liquid evaporates completely, what will be left in the container?
Which of the following is formed immediately after fertilization?
Which of the following helped lead to the invention of personal computers?
Blood absorbs oxygen in the
A student adds sugar, spices, and salt to a bowl of peanuts and stirs them together. What has the student made?
Over time, non-volcanic mountains can form due to the interaction of plate boundaries. Which interaction is most likely associated with the formation of non-volcanic mountains?
Most stars in the Milky Way are like the Sun. The Sun will eventually become a red giant. After the red giant stage, what determines whether a star will become a white dwarf or a supernova?
How should researchers share their findings with other scientists to validate their study of the effectiveness of a new medication?
Gaseous sulfur dioxide is a compound that combines with water in the atmosphere to form acid rain. What is the primary source of sulfur dioxide?
The motion of Earth is responsible for several celestial events. Which of the following events is caused by Earth revolving around the sun?
What takes place as a light wave enters a denser medium?
Deforestation in the rainforest can lead to localized extinctions of populations of some organisms. Once an area is deforested, which is most likely to decrease and result in organisms' extinctions?
Which of the following causes a ship’s iron anchor to sink to the ocean floor when it is released overboard?
In clear weather, a bright light can be seen for a long distance. In conditions of heavy fog, the visibility is greatly reduced. Which of the following explains the reduced visibility?
When the pesticide DDT was first used, it killed nearly every mosquito it touched. Within a few years, however, many mosquitoes became resistant to DDT and survived. What enabled this to happen?
When air is heated, it will most likely
The wheels and gears of a machine are greased in order to decrease
A student learns that one year on Mercury is about 88 Earth days. This means it takes 88 Earth days for Mercury to
Two processes are involved in the formation of a sand dune. Which two processes best describe how a sand dune forms?
When a student uses the equation, mass multiplied by change in temperature multiplied by specific heat, what is being calculated? q = m \times C \times \Delta T
Which rock is most likely to contain fossil seashells?
Which occurs as a result of Earth's tilt on its rotating axis?
Planets remain in orbit around the Sun because of
Which cells help to destroy pathogens such as bacteria that enter the human body?
Eye color in human beings is an
If a species is no longer able to reproduce, it will
Which of these is hottest?
In large industrial cities, the emissions from fossil fuels cause the atmosphere to change. Which process allows the atmosphere to change?
Which is the most likely response of a human to an increase in temperature?
An organism's traits are largely determined by the genetic makeup of its parents. A mutation in which kinds of cells in a parent could cause a new trait to appear in the parent's offspring?
Electricity to play your radio can be made using renewable or nonrenewable resources. Which of the following resources are renewable?
The action of turning off the water while brushing teeth is an example of
Which objects are the most useful for collecting data on the speed of a toy car?
Some microorganisms cause human disease. Other microorganisms are used in making cheese, yogurt, and bread. Based on this information, the relationship between humans and microorganisms can be
Which of these objects is visible because it reflects light toward the eye?
Which dog trait is a learned behavior?
When an atom has a neutral charge, which particles within the atom have equal numbers?
A paper bag is ripped into pieces. Which of these BEST describes the pieces of the bag?
A lizard most likely would be protected from its enemies if it has which characteristic?
Copper is used in house wiring because it is
Which process causes light to bend and form a rainbow?
Sugar is composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Sugar is an example of which of the following?
The tendency of a stationary object to resist being put into motion is known as
One way that students can help conserve natural resources at school is by
The Grand Canyon is an example of
Humans cannot survive without clean, fresh water. Reservoirs of liquid water vary, but all water spends time as a gas in the atmosphere. What is the source of most of the water in the atmosphere?
When a frying pan is placed on an electric stove top, heat energy is transferred from the burner to the pan by
What happens when water flows over a rock for a long period of time?
During winter, the white fur of an arctic fox blends in with the snow. This adaptation is called
How has the invention of the personal computer helped people the most?
Humans depend on which natural resource from the environment?
The danger posed to fish in an aquarium by an overpopulation of bacteria caused by an algal bloom is most likely a
Natural processes shape the surface of Earth. Most canyons are formed by ___.
What is the best way for a student to describe the results of an experiment?
Which of the following is a living component of a desert in California?
Scientists wonder how the Egyptian pyramids were built. They think that the huge blocks of stone may have been put into place by pushing them up a sloping pathway. The pathway is which type of simple machine?
Magnesium strips are long, thin strips that are gray and shiny. Which action will lead to a chemical change of magnesium strips?
Which involves the greatest variety of cell types?
Snapping a rubber band most likely produces which type of energy?
People can help keep a forest a good place for birds to live by
Randall is picking lettuce from his garden for dinner. His mother told him to leave some leaves on each plant. Why is it important to leave some leaves on the plant?
A negatively-charged ion has
Which statement explains what will most likely happen to the hydrosphere in an area where air temperatures increase?
Which energy source is considered nonrenewable?
When buried sediments are subjected to pressure, the mineral grains are squeezed together. What is the result of this action?
What is the primary source of energy for organisms from a beach ecosystem?
Before rock can become soil, it must undergo certain processes. One process in the formation of soil involves plants. How can plants chemically change rocks into soil?
Which is the best way a science student can help to maintain laboratory equipment?
Which of the following statements best explains why stars appear to move across Earth's sky each night?
Researchers are developing new types of crop plants with desirable characteristics such as disease resistance and drought tolerance. Crossing plants so that the next generation will express desirable traits is best described as
In May 2007, wildfires burned more than 350 square miles of habitat in Florida and Georgia. Intense fires like this one can temporarily remove nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in area soil. What most likely happens in the burned areas until organic decay replenishes the lost nutrients?
Helen is preparing a presentation about objects in the solar system. She includes facts about the order of the planets and their distances from the Sun. Which statement could she include in an accurate presentation?
Farmers in the 1800s used axes to clear trees from farmland. Now, farmers use chainsaws to clear the trees. How do chainsaws most likely help farmers?
What can a moving magnet in a coil of copper wire cause?
A researcher determines a cell has a flexible cell wall composed of peptidoglycan. This observation narrows possible classifications of the cell to which taxonomic group?
A student conducts an investigation using mold spores. In one part of the investigation, he needs to closely examine a spore sample. Which piece of equipment does the student need to use to keep mold spores from entering his respiratory system?
Vultures are scavengers that most likely help ecosystems by quickly consuming dead organisms and
What is the process called when an acid and a base combine to produce water and salt?
Amylase is a chemical that decomposes starch into maltose and dextrin. Which best describes the role of amylase in the human body?
Sound waves can pass through all of these except
Why is it important to repeat an experiment several times?
Which force causes a marble to sink to the bottom of a glass of water?
A mosquito is a type of flying insect that lays eggs in puddles or small pools of water. When larvae develop from eggs, the larvae come to the surface to get air through special breathing tubes. After one to two weeks, the larvae become pupae and then turn into adults. How would a dry summer affect a mosquito population?
NASA's Kepler Mission has collected information about main-sequence stars with characteristics similar to the Sun. What is the most common color of these stars?
A fever is a response to a disease-causing agent infecting the body. Raising one's body temperature changes the shape of enzymes in the agent so it cannot reproduce. Which statement best describes a fever?
Two people are pushing a car. One person is pushing with a force of 450 N and the other person is pushing with a force of 300 N. What information is needed to determine the net force applied to the car by the people?
A student proposes the rate of increase in a plant's mass will be proportional to the length of light exposure per day when all other variables are constant. How should this proposal be classified?
Approximately how many times will Earth rotate during one revolution around the Sun?
A shiny aluminum screen can be placed on the windshield of a parked car. This screen helps to keep the car cool because it
Which property of an object can be described as smooth?
During photosynthesis, plants absorb light energy from the Sun and convert it into chemical energy in the form of glucose. Which compounds combine in the presence of sunlight to form glucose?
A researcher is viewing a cell that has cell walls. To best narrow down the taxonomic group from which the cell belongs, which question should a researcher ask?
Which of the following best explains what will occur when a population grows larger than the carrying capacity of its environment?
Oceans have many layers of sediments. These layers become compacted when they are buried under other layers of sediments. Which is most likely to happen to the deepest layers?
The first microscopes were built in the 1600s. Microscopes have improved since then, but still perform the same job. How do microscopes most help scientists?
What do plants take from the air that helps them make food?
When a person sees something, what carries the message from the eyes to the brain?
Which of the following is an abiotic factor that can influence the quantity of fish a pond can support?
The islands in the mid-Pacific Ocean region were formed by
Which term identifies a single unit of hereditary information?
A mother hen clucks loudly when danger is near and her chicks quickly gather around her. Which sense helps the chicks receive this warning about danger from their mother?
Newly hatched turtles are easy prey for other animals. What is an important ability turtles have for better survival of their offspring?
Mr. Mendoza's class studied different body systems. What is an important function of the circulatory system?
Which example shows a new substance being formed?
What do all mammals have in common that distinguishes them from birds?
Grooves running down the sides of a riverbank are most likely caused by
Which of the following best describes a mineral?
Plankton are tiny ocean organisms. The role of one type of plankton is to use the energy from the Sun to produce food that other animals eat. Which organism has the same role in the ocean as this type of plankton?
How many times does the Moon rotate on its axis during a lunar month?
Changes to abiotic factors in an environment can impact biotic factors. Which statement is the BEST example of this situation?
There are several different types of rock. Each type of rock is formed under different conditions. How are sedimentary rocks, such as shale and sandstone, formed?
Which disease is correctly paired with the cause of the disease?
Unequal distribution of the hormone auxin in plants helps to regulate the direction of plant growth. Which of the following is accomplished by plants in regulating the distribution of auxin?
Ten people became sick with the flu after attending a school dance. What is the scenario that could best explain how the people got sick?
One way to protect against food poisoning is to
Which statement is a MAJOR mistake in the experimental design?
Which effect do rapidly cooling temperatures have on the water cycle?
A researcher found shark fossils on top of a mountain. This evidence suggests which of the following about this region?
A student is measuring the distance a car travels down a ramp using yards. Which measurement is most similar in length when using the metric system of measurement?
A marble is dropped in a glass of water. Which force pulls the marble to the bottom of the glass?
Which scientist formulated rules that describe the observable relationships of plant traits to the traits of the ancestor plants?
The invention of the telescope allowed which of the following to take place?
Which instrument should a student use to measure exactly 10 milliliters (mL) of water?
A gas is heated and its temperature increases. What happens to the gas molecules?
Which tool is used to measure the diameter of a dime?
A rainforest area is experiencing a severe drought. As a consequence, the insect population has decreased. What will the insect-eating birds most likely do as a result of the drought?
Which unit is used to indicate the amount of energy in food?
Wire was looped several times around an iron nail, and the wire's ends were connected to a battery. For which of these will this device most likely be used?
Dust and ash entering the atmosphere as a result of volcanic eruptions can affect Earth's
During which chemical process is energy absorbed?
When two nuclei are combined into one nucleus, there is a slight change in mass and the release of a large amount of energy. What is this process called?
The sound, light, and heat that a firecracker produces are originally stored as which type of energy?
Vehicle exhaust contains a form of pollution called particulate matter. Technologies are being developed to reduce the amount of particulate matter in exhaust. A vehicle that produces less particulate matter would have the greatest impact on which aspect of human health?
Janet learns that Earth is tilted. Due to its tilt, some areas on the surface of Earth experience darkness for an entire day. Which plant process is affected most during this darkness?
What types of cells are found only in organisms that reproduce sexually?
Several dinosaur bones are discovered buried in volcanic ash. The type of dinosaur can best be identified by
Stretching is considered an important step before engaging in sports. In an investigation to see whether stretching before physical exertion reduces sports injuries, who would the control group most likely be?
In the first half of this century, which technology allowed people, for the first time, to work IN the city but live OUTSIDE the city?
Most sedimentary rock is made from sediments of other rock. Which of these processes would the sediments most likely go through to form sedimentary rock?
Rocks and Earth and on the Moon are made of similar materials. What does this observation most likely suggest?
In any ecosystem, organisms interact with biotic and abiotic parts of the environment. As a result of all of the interactions, the matter within the system is
Data indicate that chemical pollutants contaminate 53% of the waterways that empty into the Chesapeake Bay. These chemical pollutants are found in the tissues of animals living in the bay. Which group of people who live away from the bay might be most affected by these chemical pollutants?
Which behavior can help animals establish a territory?
Arteries and veins are two important parts of the circulatory system. What is the relationship between arteries and veins?
Which function is a role of a feedback system?
Which technique will researchers studying the inheritance patterns of various disorders most likely use?
If a lake is polluted, which organism would most likely accumulate the highest concentration of contaminants?
Which of these can only be found in a plant cell?
The Milky Way Galaxy is visible as a bright region in the night sky. Modern telescopic observation has made it possible to discover that the brightness of the Milky Way Galaxy is due primarily to which structure?
More sulfur dioxide is being added to the atmosphere. How will this most likely affect the hydrosphere?
Plants transform energy when they make their own food. Which type of energy is used by plants for making food?
Dominic placed a caterpillar in a container with different kinds of leaves. Which information should he record to find out what food this caterpillar eats?
Which class of elements best conducts electricity?
What are the products in the chemical reaction below? NaOH + HCl -> NaCl + H_{2}O
Termites eat wood but cannot digest it. Protozoans live in the termites' stomachs and use enzymes to break down the wood. The digested wood provides nutrition for both the termites and the protozoans. What type of relationship is this?
In the Adirondack forests of New York, some trees have died. The change in the forest is thought to be related to air pollution and rain. Which abiotic factor most likely has been changed as a result of the pollution and rain which resulted in the death of the trees?
The first step in the construction of a building typically involves
What biological concept was Mendel studying when he crossed pea plants many times over many generations?
The following represents a number displayed on a calculator. 1.454545 E3. Which of the following shows how a student should record this number in a laboratory report?
In which process is nitrogen from the air put into a form that plants can use?
The surface of the Moon is covered with craters. Most of these craters were formed by
Which event would most likely occur if the number of nitrogen fixing bacteria were reduced within an ecosystem?
Census data show that the human population doubled from 2.65 billion in 1953 to 5.3 billion in 1990. If it continues to double at this rate, the human population could reach 10 billion by the year 2020. Which best explains how this rate of human growth can harm the environment on which humans depend?
Bats find their prey at night using one of their senses to detect echoes. What does the bat send out to find prey?
Which two objects produce their own light?
Which example describes an organism taking in nutrients?
In eukaryotic organisms, interaction between which organelles is most important for cell shape, tensile strength, and communication between cells?
A radio station broadcasting across a large area is experiencing thunderstorms. How will the radio waves from the station be affected?
An electrical circuit can be used to break down water into hydrogen and oxygen. In this process, electrical energy produces
Which method could be used to separate a solution of table salt and water?
Which is an example of light being reflected?
What is the MAJOR role of the Sun in the water cycle?
Which activity is an example of a chemical change?
A city has a temperature of 75 °F, with partly cloudy skies. Weather forecasters are predicting that the air pressure and temperature will drop during the day. Which type of weather is most likely for this area in the late afternoon?
In Maryland, most bears have thick, dark fur. Which statement best explains how dark fur helps bears survive in the forests of Maryland?
Nicole was studying different ecosystems. She compared the number of plants living in a forest to those in a desert. Which factor best explains why more plants may survive in a forest?
A short plant with a thick, fleshy stem, extensive roots, and a short blooming period would most likely be found in which of the following environments?
What happens when oil is placed in water?
A decomposer is an organism that
Which of the following correctly orders part of a fish's respiratory system from the least complex to most complex?
Most birds sit on their eggs until they hatch. Which of these is the most important reason why birds sit on their eggs?
A lab technician places a colony of bacterial cells in a nutrient-rich growth medium. Which event is the technician most likely to observe with a microscope?
When sound waves with large amplitude are compared to sound waves with small amplitude, which of the following is true?
Vinegar and water are placed in a container and stirred. What is formed when they are mixed?
Which of the following best describes the climate of an area?
Salt and pepper are placed together in a container. When the container is shaken, the salt and pepper become a
All natural resources on Earth are either renewable or nonrenewable. Whether a resource is renewable or nonrenewable depends on how fast or slow the resource is replaced. If the resource is used faster than it is replaced, then the resource will, in time, disappear. Which statement describes the use of a renewable natural resource?
Which of the following statements best explains why earthquakes occur more frequently in California than in Massachusetts?
Which of these describes a chemical change?
A large tree was cut down with a saw. What is the best way to estimate the age of this tree?
From smallest to largest, the levels of organization in living things are
Which object is nonliving?
What happens when oil and water are mixed?
Students measure the time for toy cars of different masses to roll down a hill. Which of the following units should the students use to measure time?
A homeowner wants to use a renewable resource to heat the home. Which resource would be the best to use?
Which of the following animal features most helps the animal move around in its habitat?
A student observes cells in an object by using a microscope. The student thinks that the object was part of a living thing. Which statement explains why cell theory can be used to support the student's thinking?
A researcher observes that an organism placed in a glass container filled with water moves away when a penlight is focused on the container. The researcher concludes that the organism is light sensitive. Which other explanation for the organism's response to the light is most possible?
Which behavior is an example of an animal adapting to a change in the environment?
Mitochondria are cell organelles that play a large role in energy processes within the body. Which cells are most likely to have a greater amount of mitochondria?
Which would be the best method to use to dispose of cardboard boxes not utilized by a local grocery store?
Which item is used for protection from chemical splashing?
Which processes change magma into igneous rock?
Sophie investigates the water supply at her school and the things that affect it. Which action is a direct observation?
Two identical books are on opposite ends of a table. Which of these would increase the gravitational force exerted between the two books?
When a guitar string is plucked, sound is produced by
What is the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis?
Which tool should a student use to compare the masses of two small rocks?
Which is an example of a chemical reaction?
Which type of evidence would a geologist need to support plate tectonic theory?
An example of a learned trait is
Angelo wants to know if the volume of water changes when it freezes. He measures the volume of water in its liquid state and then freezes it. Which tool did Angelo most likely use to measure the volume of the water?
In order for a glider to fly, its weight must be opposed by
Why does the leaf of a plant look green?
Which statement best describes the nature of sound?
Which of these provides most of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere?
A solution of lead (II) nitrate reacts with a solution of sodium iodide to produce a yellow solid of lead (II) iodide and aqueous sodium nitrate. Which of these illustrates the reaction?
A meteoroid becomes a meteorite when it
Which force causes rocks to roll downhill?
Infectious diseases are caused by
A water wave that occurs in an ocean is an example of which type of wave?
Which of the following is an example of how insects are beneficial to humans?
In a closed system, what happens to the total energy of the system as energy conversions take place?
Which of these organisms is a producer in a marine ecosystem?
Which of the following describes a reason why companies irradiate some fruits and vegetables before they are sold to the public?
A glacier is a slow moving river of ice. How does a glacier help create soil?
During winter months, Amina sometimes notices ice covering the hoods of parked cars. Once the engine of the car runs for a while, the ice on the hood begins to melt. What form of energy is released from the car engine to melt the ice?
A student notices dogs have more fleas in the summer than in the winter. Based on these observations, which is the most logical question for the student to investigate?
According to the periodic table, all of the following are metals except
A squid is an animal that lives in the ocean. It pumps a stream of water out of its body, causing it to move rapidly. Which of the following mechanical systems moves in a way most similar to the squid?
When the wax from a candle drips, the wax has reached
In the morning, students observed puddles of water all over the playground. What would best explain why the playground was dry in the afternoon?
Many areas of Massachusetts have small deep ponds called kettle ponds. Which of the following best explains the formation of these ponds?
What relationship exists between a dog and its fleas?
Which of the following could limit the supply of a renewable resource?
Which statement best describes the energy transformations that occur when a candle burns?
Pesticides and fertilizers can help farmers to produce more crops. However, overuse of these chemicals can result in
What type of energy travels through the body of a microscope that allows the specimen to be seen by a student?
A powder made up of both white specks and black specks is likely to be
In the past, wild hogs called "javelinas" were seen only in the southern part of New Mexico. Now, javelinas are seen in areas 100 miles further north. What is the most likely cause of this expansion?
Which is the best example of a pure substance?
Which tool would best help a person observe the parts of a plant cell?
The energy stored in the bonds of a glucose molecule during photosynthesis is in what form?
What happens to water molecules during the boiling process?
Evidence suggests that there is a relationship between ancient dinosaurs and modern birds. Through time, each occurrence of a new trait most likely resulted from which of the following?
Which of the following can cause erosion?
Living things are classified as producers or consumers according to
A hydrologist studies the location, movement, and quality of water. A hydrologist recognizes the importance that water exists as ___.
Which of these can be recycled in an attempt to conserve resources?
This in turn causes the average temperature on Earth to rise. Which of the following observations supports that theory?
Which of these can be mined from Earth and used as an energy source?
Which tool is used to determine how long it takes warm water to melt an ice cube?
Two scientists doing the same experiment got different results. Which would be the best way to figure out which result might be correct?
A lipid bilayer allows certain molecules to pass through and blocks other molecules. Which structure is most often protected by a lipid bilayer?
Traits are transferred from generation to generation through the
Many scientists theorize that global warming will melt the polar ice caps. What would most likely happen if the polar ice caps melted?
Which of the following groups of organisms uses sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into sugar and oxygen?
What is the first step in designing a product?
Solids that are combined together and maintain their physical properties are best labeled as a
A group of vertebrates has lungs, a body covered with scales, internal fertilization, and amniotic eggs. Which group of vertebrates does this describe?
The brain, spinal cord, and nerves are organs that perform which primary function?
Mammals must eliminate waste products that their bodies produce. Which organ helps mammals eliminate bodily waste?
A pot is heated on a stove. Which process causes the metal handle of the pot to also become hot?
In making a pizza, which process involves a chemical change?
Base your answers on the information below. One hot, summer day it rained very heavily. After the rain, a plastic pan on a picnic table had 2 cm of rainwater in it. Four hours later, all the rainwater in the pan was gone. Which process caused the rainwater in the pan to disappear as it sat outside in the hot air?
Which process must occur for clouds to form?
In 1918, an outbreak of influenza infected 500,000 people all over the world. Tens of millions of those infected died. In 1994, an outbreak of pneumonic plague spread quickly through the city of Surat in India, killing 52 people. Which statement best describes the two events?
On the periodic table, the elements in group 18 (8A) (helium, neon, argon, etc.) are grouped together because
Which of the following is a consumer?
Which statement explains why light from the Sun can warm up water in a glass?
Which characteristic is an example of learned behavior?
Which of these is a negative effect associated with some types of new technology?
What is the main source of energy for the water cycle?
Sharpening a pencil and tearing paper are examples of physical changes. Which statement describes why these are physical changes?
Air in the atmosphere is heated unevenly by the sun, causing
Which sense is used to determine an object's texture?
Which statement describes a method of sexual reproduction that occurs in plants?
Campers shouted toward a canyon wall. What characteristic of sound best explains why the campers heard an echo?
A recent scientific study funded by a medical corporation concluded that its product is not as harmful as consumers have reported. Identify a possible problem with this study.
Nerve cells transmitting messages to the body best demonstrate which primary function?
A drinking water reservoir for a small town develops a blue-green algae bloom. The town hires a company to eliminate the problem. Which of the following should the company investigate first as a likely source of the problem?
What travels through the stem of a plant?
Which of these is an inherited behavior?
In 1987, a supernova was detected in the Large Magellanic Cloud galaxy, which is approximately 169,000 light years from Earth. Which event produces a supernova?
Extinction of a species is most likely to occur as a result of
When water vapor rises and cools, the liquid water in the air comes together forming
Which of the following allows materials to enter and leave a cell?
Sandy and Keith plan to move a 6-kilogram block. If they wanted to calculate the mechanical energy required to move the block, what units would they use to report their answer?
DNA stores the genetic instructions transferred from one generation to the next. What is DNA?
Which list is correctly ordered from smallest to largest?
Which of the following has the greatest effect on the ability of soil to hold water?
The Water Quality Act of 1987 required the development of standards that would prevent toxic pollutants from reaching dangerous levels in bodies of water. This act affected the amounts of toxic chemicals that could be discharged into bodies of water. Which of the following would have been most regulated by this act?
Which element is necessary for the formation of coal?
Some ancient Greeks tried to discover the laws of the universe through thought and logic. Which part of the scientific process were these scientists missing?
Which best describes a characteristic of the jet stream?
Single-celled organisms can reproduce and create cells exactly like themselves without combining genes from two different parent cells. When they do this, they use a type of
Most stars are similar to each other in
Which BEST explains why green marine algae are most often restricted to the top 100 meters of the ocean?
Which of these locations in the solar system contains the most asteroids?
The body is able to detect pressure on its surface by which direct means?
Which of these is an organism that is unicellular?
Mark wants to make lemonade for his friends. He uses water, lemon juice, and sugar. Which of these best describes the lemonade?
Sandra puts some pill bugs into an open box. She covers half the box with a piece of cardboard. She then places the box outside on a summer day, and all the pill bugs move under the cardboard. The pill bugs are most likely responding to which of the following?
During science class, students combined 1 kg of iron filings with 1 kg of sand to create a mixture. Which of the following methods would be best for separating the iron filings from the sand?
Which is the thickest layer of Earth?
Wind can cause erosion that changes the surface of the Earth. Wind erosion can have negative effects on the environment by removing soil and polluting the air during dust storms. Which of the following land forms are created by wind erosion?
Deer eat different types of plants in an ecosystem. Which method would best show the percentages of the plant types in the deer diet?
How does a human body get energy?
Some birds fly south before winter each year. This is an example of
Which system supports the body, protects internal organs, and makes blood cells?
The smallest particle of an element is
A student is writing a report on volcanoes. What should the student include to best help explain how a volcano works?
Base your answer on the information below and on your knowledge of science. A baseball strikes the roof of a car and dents it. The paint on the roof begins to crack and chip, exposing the metal. The exposed metal on the roof rusts, eventually causing a small hole in the roof. Which event is a chemical change?
Which energy resource is renewable?
Which energy conversion process occurs whenever coal is burned?
Claudia's teacher places a photograph of an organism on the board. He asks Claudia to determine if the organism is a plant or an animal. The answer to which question will best help Claudia determine if the organism is a plant or an animal?
Based on analysis of deep ice cores from the Arctic, scientists theorize that early humans caused air pollution. These scientists can make sure their data is correct by
When a volcano erupts, dust and ash are blown into the atmosphere. The eruption directly reduces the transfer of energy from
Which change would most likely cause deer to die or leave a woodland?
A student observes a glowing band across the night sky. This glowing band is most likely
What is the smallest unit of an element that still has the properties of that element?
The longitude of a location determines which time zone it is in. Different time zones are the result of
Which of these structures form when materials are deposited, buried, and cemented?
Earth is made of different layers that have varying characteristics. Which is the thickest layer?
Which are examples of inherited traits?
An object has a weight of 10 kg on the surface of Earth. If the same object were transported to the surface of Mars, the object would have a weight of 3.8 kg. Which best explains why the weight of the object changed when transported from Earth to Mars?
Which characteristic can a puppy inherit from its parents?
According to Darwin's theory of evolution, the variations among finches that he observed in the Galapagos Islands resulted from
Jennifer has collected rocks while hiking. As she attempts to classify her rocks, which will she put in the pile of sedimentary rocks?
Which form of energy is found in food?
The Sun is a medium-sized star and is expected to continue to perform nuclear fusion for five billion years. What is most likely to be the final stage of the Sun?
Which statement is the best description of the Milky Way galaxy?
When specific hormones are present in the blood of a hen, an egg is released from an ovary. Which two systems are involved with the release of an egg?
Fossil records indicate that Earth was first inhabited by bacteria-like organisms. These organisms
Onions can reproduce from bulbs. One parent bulb generates daughter bulbs with duplicate genetic information. Which is the most likely advantage of this kind of reproduction?
Which action involving a pulley system requires the least amount of force?
In which environment would a white rabbit be best protected from predators?
Which form of energy is needed to change water from a liquid to a gas?
Which of these is a function of a leaf?
Which of these is most likely to be spread when two people drink from the same water bottle?
The sum of all chemical reactions in the human body is known as
The water contained in a geyser system gains energy from the underground material surrounding it. The water molecules gain kinetic energy and this results in an increase in the pressure of the water. Eventually the geyser erupts and expels water into the air above ground. Which of the following types of energy is the source for the initial energy gain of the water?
In a laboratory activity, four different types of rock were placed in identical acid solutions for one week. Each sample was then measured to see if any of the rock mass was dissolved by the acid solution. Which is the dependent (responding) variable in this activity?
Which cell structure carries out a function for a cell that is similar to the function that bark carries out for a tree?
The number of squirrels in a certain ecosystem changes over time. These changes can be represented as a number of connected data points. Which method would a student most likely use to show this information?
Pedro shook a can of soda. When the soda was opened, foam and soda burst from the can. Which statement best explains what happened?
Where is most of Earth's water located?
Investigations were performed to test several methods of keeping petals from falling off flowers that had been cut. Which is the most likely reason for this investigation?
Two seismographs are placed 500 km from an active fault line, one on each side of the active fault line. During an earthquake, what most likely accounts for the different readings on the seismographs?
Scientists dig in a dry area at the bottom of a mountain range. Fossilized shells of freshwater mussels are found in the area. Which is a likely conclusion that scientists will draw based on this evidence?
An apple appears red when struck by white light. This appearance is because the red light is reflected and the other colors are absorbed. What color will this apple appear to be when struck by blue light?
In New York State, an observer will usually see the Sun rise in the
Burning coal and natural gas are ways to produce electricity. Both coal and natural gas are nonrenewable resources. Which is an example of producing electricity using a renewable source of energy?
When liquid water freezes, it forms ice. What is the physical state of an ice cube?
A student uses a hand lens to observe which of these objects?
Which type of rock would most likely contain a fossil?
Some events on Earth happen instantly while others take thousands of years to occur. Which process takes the longest time to complete?
Where do many of the basic life functions take place in organisms?
Which physical structure would best help a bear to survive a winter in New York State?
What is made when sugar is dissolved in water?
Gasoline for cars is produced from fossil fuels. Using gasoline can most likely lead to which environmental problem?
Which of the following is a cause of the ocean levels periodically rising and then falling?
A scientist is searching for areas where new solar systems might form. What feature is the scientist looking for?
About how often is a full moon observed from Earth's surface?
When animals use energy, they produce
Which would provide evidence of seafloor spreading?
Mitosis occurs in living things when a cell divides to produce two cells. Compared to the original cell, how many chromosomes are in each of the resulting cells?
Which organ directly works to protect the human body from disease?
Steven went to a farm and picked a bright red tomato from a broken branch on the plant. The tomato had a rotten spot with a worm inside of it. Instead of eating the tomato, Steven decided to plant the seeds and grow new tomato plants. Which characteristic of the tomato plant is inherited and could change over several generations?
Many leaves appear green because the leaves
Which of these is the best definition of heredity?
Which of the following describes how a microwave oven heats food?
Which three systems of the human body function together to move and control body parts?
Astronomers have found evidence for the existence of a super-massive black hole in the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. What is thought to cause black holes to form?
A research team wanted to produce a smaller variety of German shepherd dogs. They mated the smallest dogs from different litters for several generations. This is an example of which concept?
A class learns about weather. The students in the class measure the outside air temperature at the same time each day. Which way of measuring the temperature would provide the most accurate data?
Earth's magnetosphere is not uniformly shaped. It is compressed on the side facing the Sun and has a long tail extending away from the Sun. Which phenomenon is responsible for this shape?
Which living organism makes its own food using sunlight?
Who was the first person to base a system of classification on organisms having similar structures?
Which is a process that converts sunlight energy into a compound that stores chemical energy?
Which most likely contributed to the extinction of many species and endangered the survival of others?
Which is the most basic unit of living things?
What are the two main jobs of the skeletal system?
Which is an example of a chemical change?
Which of these is a renewable resource found in Nevada?
Which two body systems are involved in inhaling oxygen and exhaling carbon dioxide?
Materials such as carbon and nitrogen go through cycles. The cycling of nitrogen waste materials is mostly dependent upon the role of which factor?
Which of these is unique to the process of scientific investigation?
Which did Thomas Edison invent?
If soil is permeable
Sally is making candy on the stove. She places a thermometer in the candy. What is she measuring?
Anthony and Zach want to know how the temperature of the air affects the temperature of lake water. Which type of tool should they use to measure the temperatures?
Which serve as evidence for a scientific theory?
Which of the following identifies the primary function of a radio station tower in a communication system?
Down feathers are used by many sleeping bag manufacturers because down feathers are
A farmer sprayed his orange trees with a pesticide to eliminate the insects damaging the trees. Some of the insects survived and produced offspring that were also resistant to the insecticide. Which process is illustrated by the pesticide resistance of the offspring?
An elephant is a multicellular organism that weighs about 200 pounds at birth and can grow to weigh as much as 15,000 pounds. What increases as the elephant grows into an adult?
The human body is made up of organ systems that work together as one unit. Which systems work together to prepare and distribute food for cells?
The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. Which organs are used in reproduction?
Which type of organism is at the lowest level of the food chain?
Jake's cats eat food from a can. The cats come running into the kitchen when they hear the electric can opener. Now, each time Jake's mother opens a can of corn, the cats come running. This is an example of
A team of surveyors takes measurements of ground altitude at horizontal intervals of 1 meter over a 400 square meter area. These measurements can best be used to produce which representation of the area?
Some schools have programs to recycle paper products such as student papers, newspapers, and cardboard boxes. Which of these statements describes a positive effect of recycling paper products?
Light sometimes behaves as waves and other times as particles. Which property of light is equally explainable by treating light as either particles or waves?
The topography of Nevada is dominated by basins and mountain ranges associated with which geological phenomena?
Which biological activity occurs in a repeated rhythm?
Which model best illustrates the wave property that enables scientists to explore Earth's interior using seismic waves?
In 1933, a hurricane came ashore at Ocean City, Maryland. A hurricane negatively affects a coastline by
Which statement describes the location of our Sun in the universe?
Scientists claim that the area around the Grand Canyon was once covered by an ocean. What evidence would support their claim?
Which is true of scientific discoveries?
Which is a process that most likely formed the Appalachian Mountains found in the eastern part of North America?
Which technology used to generate electrical power involves a trade-off between economical electricity and long-term waste disposal problems?
All the ponds in an area dried up during a drought. The population of which of the following animals that live in the area is most affected by the drought?
Which substance is usually found in nature as a liquid, solid, and gas?
The scientific name for a giraffe is Giraffa camelopardalis. What two levels of classification does this name represent?
The Moon has the greatest effect on Earth's
Granite is classified as a rock because it
The measure of the amount of light received on Earth from a star is known as
Heat from deep in Earth's interior is transferred to its crust by which of the following?
The growth of which of the following usually occurs first in primary succession on a bare rock?
The process by which water vapor in the atmosphere cools and becomes a liquid is called
A student is dropping objects of various sizes and shapes and recording the time it takes for each object to hit the ground. Which question is the student most likely trying to answer?
Which two processes in the water cycle are primarily responsible for the creation of a lake?
The correct procedure after completing a laboratory experiment is to
Which is an example of primary ecological succession?
What is true of mutualistic relationships among organisms?
Carolina uses a microscope to view a soil sample taken from her backyard. Which part of the soil would she ONLY be able to see with a microscope?
The part of the rock cycle that transforms compressed rock formed from sea organism shells into a harder, denser rock is
A group of scientists predicts that Earth's oceans will be able to take up more carbon dioxide as atmospheric carbon dioxide levels increase and the atmosphere warms. Which of these statements about the solubility of gases in ocean water would lead you to question this prediction?
Which of the following elements is best able to combine with itself and hydrogen [H] to form large molecules?
Growing thicker fur in the winter helps some animals to
Several types of mechanisms in the body regulate the rate of chemical reactions in the digestive system. Among the most important are feedback systems, which control the release rate of
The water in a pond gets colder one night. Which tool is best to observe its temperature change?
During subduction, one tectonic plate is forced below another. The subducting plate is forced into the
What two gases make up most of the Earth's atmosphere?
A light-year is a measure of
Some birds live in a forest. If many of the trees in the forest are cut down, the shelter for the birds will
In the human body, cellular respiration breaks down sugar molecules after they enter the cell. What results from this process?
What causes a person to have blue eyes?
When an atom loses or gains an electron, it changes
In which pair of elements are both metalloids?
Florida has a large supply of phosphate that ancient seas deposited millions of years ago. The phosphate contains the remains of animals that were deposited in layers on the sea floor. Which type of rock did the phosphate become?
After months of studying and obtaining data on the behavior of birds, biologists from around the world will look at the data and
Which mixture can be easily separated by adding water and pouring it through a coffee filter?
Living things depend on energy from
Research into the total amount of oil available for use around the world can affect what kind of human choice?
Hydrochloric acid (HCl) reacts with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) to produce a saltwater solution. What are the products of this chemical reaction?
Which human activity most often has a harmful effect on the environment?
Young frogs do not resemble adult frogs. Which term is given to this pattern of development in frogs?
Bones support the body. What pulls and pushes on bones to move them?
Which statement best describes why a calcium-fortified juice would advertise that it is good for growing children?
Which of these tectonic plate boundaries is most likely to form a volcano?
Which of the following is an example of heat transfer by conduction?
Alicia gives her brother a push while he is seated on a swing. She finds that after a few seconds, she needs to push again to keep him going. The reason her brother slows down is because the mechanical energy is converted into
An example of a learned behavior is a
An atom consists of a nucleus surrounded by
Which of these causes the atmosphere to change?
Which element is most likely to form an ion with a negative 2 charge?
Mount St. Helens was a cone-shaped mountain that formed when molten material reached the surface of Earth and formed layers. Cone-shaped mountains form as a result of which one of these events?
Which process in the water cycle would be accelerated by an increase in temperature?
Which of the following foods is highest in polysaccharides?
Colored alcohol is used in some glass thermometers. When placed in air of different temperatures, the column of alcohol rises or falls in the glass thermometer. Which of the following best explains why the height of the alcohol column changes?
An organism, such as a nematode worm, may have only 1000 cells. It should be classified as being
The Heliocentric Theory, as supported by Copernicus, revolutionized scientific theories regarding
Which process causes the leaves of a plant to become larger?
Wind changes the surface of Earth. Which of these land formations is a result of transportation and deposition by wind?
Water moves by capillary action through soil from moist areas to dry areas. Which property of water is most responsible for this capillary action?
Which action is the best method to separate a mixture of salt and water?
In humans, a trait can be determined by one pair or many pairs of
Which animal develops inside its mother before it is born alive?
Which sequence correctly shows the levels of organization for structure and function in a human?
Which adaptation allows a fish to get oxygen underwater?
The number of daylight hours in New York State changes with the
Which instrument would be used when studying a unit on amphibian anatomy?
Which is a reason for Arkansas having multiple seasons?
Jessica watches the Sun set in the evening sky. What causes the setting of the Sun?
To which planet do National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) scientists hope to send humans next?
Which force keeps the planets in their orbits around the Sun?
The endangered Florida manatee is a large, aquatic mammal that feeds on sea grasses in brackish water. Due to where they like to feed, manatees are vulnerable to injuries from boat propellers. If speed zones requiring boats to maintain a low speed are placed in areas where manatees are known to congregate, which will most likely occur?
Which is an example of a different substance being formed?
A mixture of powdered iron and sulfur is heated. What will be formed?
Scientists can identify an element by looking at the structure of a single
Newly made proteins are modified in which organelle?
Which of the following is the primary advantage of sexual reproduction when compared to asexual reproduction?
By attaching to sharks, remora fish eat the scraps of food left behind when the sharks feed. If remoras were not able to attach to sharks, they would most likely
Plants need a source of energy in order to perform photosynthesis. From which source do plants receive the energy needed to perform photosynthesis?
What form of energy is stored in a battery?
When a light bulb is turned on, energy changes from one form to another. Which of the following best describes this change?
Which stimulus causes a porcupine to extend its quills?
When a balloon is filled with air and suddenly released, it will fly around the room as the air escapes. If compared to space transportation, the escaping air is most similar to what subsystem of a spacecraft?
The Sun appears larger than other stars because of its
How hot is it on the surface of the Sun?
Which two observations are both used to describe weather?
A scientist combines oxygen and hydrogen to form water. This combination illustrates that water is
In a large forest with many animals, there are only a small number of bears. Which of these most likely limits the population of bears in the forest?
There is a thunderstorm close to your house. The windows rattle at the same time that you hear the thunder. What causes the windows to rattle?
Rocks in warm and humid environments can be weathered faster than rocks in other environments. Which is most likely the next step in the rock cycle for weathered rocks?
If the solar system were used as a model of an atom, what would the Sun most likely represent?
A student provides the following directions for brushing teeth: • Turn on the water. • Fill the glass with water and leave the water running. • Put toothpaste on the toothbrush. • Brush for two minutes. • Rinse mouth with the water from the glass. • Rinse the toothbrush with the running water. • Turn off the water. Which change in these directions would conserve the most water?
Which of these shows the correct order for the central dogma of molecular biology?
Meiosis contributes to the process of reproduction by producing what type of cell?
The abundance of a mineral at the surface of Earth most likely depends upon the
Which has the greatest effect on aiding the movement of blood through the human body?
Why should scientists wear goggles during experiments?
Which of the following organisms produces energy from sunlight?
Which statement is true for all objects?
Elements in the same column of the Periodic Table of the Elements all
What is the main function of scales on a fish?
Which invention made mass production possible?
What causes a meteoroid to glow as it falls through the atmosphere of Earth?
The cheetah population around the world has decreased because of poaching and loss of habitat. The surviving population is found to have similar alleles. Which factor is endangering the species' survival the most?
What is generated when the students count and record the number of organisms in the pond water?
The Mariana Trench is the deepest ocean trench on Earth. This trench occurs at a plate boundary where
Students want to find out at which temperature bean plants grow tallest. Which science process skill would be used to find this temperature?
When would the highest tides occur along the Texas coast?
Sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) combine to form sodium chloride (NaCl), which is commonly known as
It rained on a hot summer afternoon and a puddle formed. After several hours, the puddle was gone. Which two processes made the puddle form and then disappear?
Which environmental problem was directly caused by the invention of the automobile?
At some places in Florida, sand on the beaches is being reduced. New sand is brought from other areas and spread on the beaches. What process causes this reduction to the beach sand?
Which characteristic of a volvox colony makes it more like a multicellular organism than a simple cluster of unicellular organisms?
Students are investigating which type of fruit attracts the most fruit flies. Equally sized pieces of ripe apple, peach, and banana are placed in separate containers. The containers allow fruit flies to enter, but the fruit flies are unable to escape. The containers are placed outside on a picnic table for two days. The most reliable method for collecting data is to count the number of fruit flies
Malaria is a common disease in many countries. What is the cause of this disease?
Mold is often found growing on old bread. In a food chain, mold is a ___.
Which form of energy are x rays and ultraviolet light?
Which of these geographic features most directly influences the climate of Nevada by limiting the amount of water vapor that can reach the state and fall as rain?
Cells come in two basic types, prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Which cell structure is found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?
From which part of the plant does a bee get food?
As Earth revolves around the Sun, the number of daylight hours varies from place to place. In which location would the number of daylight hours remain constant?
Why does tapping a fork against a water glass produce a sound?
A student places a sheet of black construction paper on her desk. What happens to most of the light that strikes the black construction paper?
Which of these groups animals are ALL mammals?
Which part of a plant cell is responsible for controlling the activities of the other parts of the cell?
All metabolic functions fall into one of two categories: a breaking down process (catabolic) or a building up process (anabolic). Which is an example of an anabolic process?
Clearing forests of trees and vegetation for human development can have major impacts on the ecosystem. Which would most likely occur after a forested area is cleared?
Which of these is the most responsible for the changes of the seasons on Earth?
Turning off the light when leaving a room is an example of
Which list contains only things that are part of our solar system?
A family installs a new heating system in their home. Which is the most desirable result of the new heating system?
The Andes Mountains in South America formed when an oceanic plate shifted beneath a continental plate. Which other landforms are usually associated with this type of plate boundary?
Which of the following animals goes through metamorphosis?
Which group of organisms can make food by a process called chemosynthesis?
Which of these are broken down during chemical, but not physical, changes?
Fossils of clam shells were found in the Appalachian Mountains. Which of these statements best explains why the clam shells were found in the Appalachian Mountains?
When a formula unit of magnesium sulfide, MgS, is separated into magnesium and sulfur particles, the particles are called
Which action is an example of an exothermic process?
Which best explains why some reptiles and amphibians lay an abundance of eggs?
Which is the best example of recycling?
When two objects are touching, heat is transferred from the warmer object to the cooler one by
Genes code for specifically structured
What is the repeating monomer of a DNA molecule?
The range of all forms of radiant energy is called the
Which of the following is one reason that quartz is classified as a mineral?
Which of the following activities is the best example of instinctive behavior in an animal?
If wolves prey on deer for food, what will most likely happen to the deer population if wolves are removed from an area where deer live?
Which is a feedback mechanism the human body uses to maintain homeostasis?
Changes to Earth's surface can happen slowly or quickly. Which of these changes happens the most quickly?
What event happens in a daily cycle?
The burning of fossil fuels has added pollutants that contain sulfur atoms to the air. These pollutants have contributed to which of the following?
A scientist was examining a large boulder that was covered with lichens (a combination of fungi and algae). He chipped a piece of the rock and placed it under a microscope. He observed that the surface of the rock was breaking down underneath the lichen. Which was the scientist most likely observing?
Which organism belongs in the kingdom Protista?
How is the structure of an atom best described?
What do producers need to make food?
Fish can live in lakes that are frozen because liquid water remains below the ice at the surface. Which of these describes a property of water that allows some liquid water to remain in frozen lakes?
A certain disease of the spinal cord can be passed on from a dog to its offspring. This disease can result in the dog's muscles becoming weak, leading to paralysis. This is an example of
Paula determines a property of a marble using a balance and a graduated cylinder. What property is Paula most likely determining by using both tools?
Why do satellites and spacecraft launched from Earth need to reach a specific speed to escape Earth's surface?
Which of these is a nonliving part of a forest?
Which change increases the rate of a chemical reaction?
Which characteristic is found ONLY in mammals?
The relationship between an owl and a mouse is a
The heart, veins, arteries, and capillaries make up which organ system?
Some kinds of fish live most of their lives in salt water but lay their eggs in freshwater. Their ability to survive in different environments is an example of
Which of the following statements applies to all states of matter?
Which process in the water cycle returns water from the surface of Earth to the atmosphere?
Which of the following organisms have the greatest effect on an ecosystem because of the changes they make to their environment?
Which inventor had the greatest impact on the development of artificial light?
Mounds and ridges in the Snake Range area of Nevada are composed of boulders, sand, and gravel. These landforms were most likely formed by
Noah studied different systems in the human body. Which best describes a function of veins in the circulatory system?
A genetic mutation has caused the fur color of field mice to contrast with their environment. This type of mutation will most likely
Ella has several wooden blocks. When Ella holds the blocks in her hand, she feels that they are rough. Which term best describes what Ella feels?
Which is most likely a cancer treatment?
What happens to the physical state of water when it freezes?
When electric current flows through the metal filament of a light bulb, electrical energy is converted to
At night, the Moon is the brightest object in the sky. Where does the Moon's light come from?
Strong winds have the ability to uproot large trees in a wooded area. Which of these organisms would most likely benefit from this change in a habitat?
Residential construction is expanding in Florida. The expansion has caused fragmentation of habitats. One of the results of the increased construction is a decrease in the number of large predators such as the coyote, black bear, and panther. Which will be the most immediate local result of this fragmentation?
Which of these resources is renewable?
Which property of air does a barometer measure?
Which measurement represents the mass of an object?
The primary function of insulin in our bodies is to
Which type of organism is the best at fixing nitrogen?
A scientist studies how weathering and erosion can change the shape of a mountain. The scientist needs to collect information over what period of time to gather the most accurate information?
Many types of organisms live in a meadow. With the introduction of a large, swift-moving predator into the meadow ecosystem, which group of organisms will MOST likely have an advantage of surviving and reproducing?
The systems of the human body work together. Which system works with the skeletal system by pulling on the bones to create movement?
Scientists Stanley Miller and Harold Urey sealed water, methane, ammonia, and hydrogen in a flask, to simulate Earth's early environment. They exposed the chemicals to electric charges to simulate lighting. What did the process produce?
Many birds fly south for the winter. This adaptation is called
Air is made up of many gases. Which gas is found in the greatest amount?
Biotic forces can cause changes to the surface of Earth. Which is the best example of living organisms causing weathering?
The digestion process begins in which of the following?
Certain fossils can be used to help determine the age of the rock layer in which the fossils are found. Which type of fossil is best to use when making this determination?
In pea plants, tall is dominant over short. What size pea plants will result when a pure tall plant is crossed with a pure short plant?
One way animals usually respond to a sudden drop in temperature is by
The continental crust floats on top of the mantle because the crust is
Joanne wants to investigate factors that affect different patterns of the flight of bees. Which step in the scientific method must she follow before forming a hypothesis?
Which set contains kingdoms that contain only heterotrophs?
Chromosomes contain the genetic information of an organism. Fruit flies reproduce by sexual reproduction. Most of the cells of a fruit fly have 8 chromosomes. Which statement best explains the source of the chromosomes in a normal fertilized fruit fly egg?
Which weather instrument measures air pressure?
A volcano under the ocean slowly releases lava over time. As the lava is released, it cools and hardens on the ocean floor. Which feature will most likely form from the release and cooling of the lava on the ocean floor over time?
The main function of a duck's webbed feet is to help the duck
Which is a quick process that can form new land near an ocean?
Which of these features of Earth's crust are caused by the shifting of tectonic plates?
Which of the following helps the leaves break down after they have fallen off the tree?
Where are proteins synthesized?
When compared to current average conditions, which term would best describe conditions in Earth's lower atmosphere if greenhouse gases were absent?
Plumes of water vapor have been observed rising from the southern polar region of Enceladus, one of the moons of Saturn. A team of scientists proposed an explanation for the plumes and developed a model. They also published calculations based on their model. These calculations would most likely be used for which purpose in future research?
If water gets into the crack of a rock and then freezes, the rock will MOST likely
Which organisms form the base of all ecosystems?
Martin is writing a report for science class about how the tilt of Earth affects living organisms. Which subject should Martin include in his report that is directly affected by Earth's tilt?
In what way do transit systems, such as buses, benefit society?
Increased nutrient levels in lakes can cause ecological changes that result in the death of many fish. At what point in the hydrological cycle are most nutrients deposited into lakes?
Which of these cell parts contain instructions for the passage of traits from one generation to the next?
Which action causes a chemical change?
Which type of organism would most likely benefit directly from increased levels of CO_{2}?
When the lighted half of the Moon faces the Sun and the dark half faces Earth, the phase of the Moon viewed from Earth is called the
The flower petals of a hydrangea plant change color as the acidity of the soil changes. The color changes are directly related to which factor?
What is significant about the discovery of water on Mars?
A teacher places an item in a box. The item takes the shape of the entire container. This item is most likely
In New York State, the shortest period of daylight occurs during which month?
During which of the processes below does water vapor change to liquid water?
Which technological advancement has done the most to improve the accuracy of weather predictions?
An important rule for students to know when heating a test tube is to
How would a drought most likely affect the plants of a grassy plain?
The brain and spinal cord are parts of which body system?
Chromosome mutations involve the deletion or duplication of many genes. The effects of chromosome mutations are often much greater than mutations within a single gene, because chromosome mutations
What will most likely result when the jet stream moves south of North Carolina?
Estuaries in Florida often have mangrove trees growing in them. The roots of the mangrove trees slow the flow of the water, which allows soil particles to settle. If people were allowed to remove the mangrove trees, how would the estuary environment most likely be affected?
Which sense can be used to determine an object's ability to reflect light?
The North America Nebula is named for its similarity in shape to the North American continent. It was discovered within the Milky Way by astronomer William Herschel in 1790. What was Mr. Herschel most likely observing?
Which animals are most likely to carry the seeds found in berries from the parent plant to another area?
All rocks are composed of
In some dry areas, large amounts of water have been pumped from underground sources where water has been naturally stored for thousands of years. If the water is not replaced, what type of land feature is most likely to result?
Which scientist studied biology by traveling by ship to different islands observing animal life, and developed a hypothesis about how species change?
How does a student best avoid becoming dehydrated during a field investigation on a hot day?
The primary function of a doorbell circuit is to convert electrical energy into
A lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes through Earth's shadow. A lunar eclipse can only occur during a
A recent study concluded that about 90% of all large predatory fish such as tuna have disappeared from the world's oceans in the past 50 years. Which of these is most likely the direct cause of this loss?
When an ice cube melts, its state of matter changes from a
In which way are evaporation and condensation similar?
The surface of a heated metal object measures 120°C. It is dropped into a bucket filled with water measuring 10°C. Which of the following is most likely to occur?
In order to record the passing of a distant comet, which instruments would be the most useful?
Temperature is the measurement of which type of energy?
Scientists are discovering ways to make some crops use less water. A person working in which job would most benefit from this research?
Stem cells are cells that can differentiate into many different kinds of cells. Scientists have discovered that the environment supporting the cells influences stem-cell differentiation. For example, stem cells grown on strong, flexible surfaces became muscle cells. What most likely happened to stem cells grown on a hard, rigid surface?
Sherry is going to use her computer to draw a three-dimensional box. She wants to be able to specify the exact dimensions and angles and to rotate the box as needed on the screen. Which of the following types of programs would Sherry most likely use for this purpose?
Scientists who have studied the hydrosphere concluded that about 71% of Earth is covered with water. Which part of the hydrosphere is most often associated with the formation of organic rocks?
Which property of proteins best allows them to perform an enormously diverse range of functions?
The mathematical model for calculating speed is shown below. Speed = distance/time. An airplane traveled 700 kilometers in two hours during a trip. What was the average speed of the plane during the trip?
What is the best way for a marine scientist to determine the eating habits of sharks?
A student pushes a wooden block across a sheet of sandpaper. Which characteristic of the block increases?
Amanda is learning about different adaptations of animals. Which is an example of a behavioral adaptation?
Which of the following is the best example of a custom-made product?
Michelle is interested in improving the quality of the soil in her yard. She wants more water and air to penetrate the soil. What should she add to the soil to help her achieve this goal?
Which of these could cause water vapor to condense into rain droplets?
The human body processes and eliminates food waste using the organs of the excretory system. Which organelle performs a similar function in humans at the cellular level?
What causes the most soil and rock erosion?
The theory of continental drift states that the land masses called continents were once closer together and have drifted apart over time. Which circumstance is the strongest evidence in support of this theory?
Rich beds of marine fossils have been found in Florida. By dating these fossils, scientists can best determine
In the forest, one type of tree produces special seeds. These seeds start to grow only after going through a fire. In the fire, the adult trees are destroyed. Which resources, needed for growth, are now available to the newly growing seeds?
Which is an example of a decomposer?
In the lab, students are working with substances that could cause burns. Which of these safety precautions is most important to follow?
Which process moves an ion across a cell membrane against the concentration gradient?
Which would most likely be the characteristic of an object with a small volume and large mass?
Which of these describes a small range in the electromagnetic spectrum?
An idea that the universe originated with an explosion is supported by repeated observations of light from distant galaxies traveling away from Earth. An idea that has been tested repeatedly and is supported by repeated results is most likely a
Natural selection cannot occur without
In which of these investigations would pictures from a camera be most useful?
Of the examples listed, which event is thought by scientists to have led to the greatest extinction?
The human stomach is protected from self-digestion by a layer of
On a field trip, a student holds a frog and reports that it has slippery skin. This is an example of
What most likely happens to soil when crops are not rotated from year to year?
Materials must pass through a cell's semi-permeable membrane in order for energy to be utilized. This process is called
What is a decomposer?
Modern technology has had some positive and negative effects on society. Which would be a negative effect of advances in technology?
Which of the following allows a cell to become specialized?
Which tool would be best to use for counting the number of legs on an ant?
A dragonfly develops through incomplete metamorphosis. Which stages does the dragonfly's life cycle include?
When a cold front moves over a land region that has warm, moist air, a transfer of energy occurs. Cold air sinks and pushes warmer air upward. As energy is removed from the air, which change will most likely take place?
Which sequence lists the levels of organization in the human body from simplest to most complex?
Cancer is best described as
To pump blood through the body, the heart must overcome the force of gravity. Which body position would require the least work from the heart?
In order to grow two of the exact same plants, a person would reproduce them asexually because the
In flowering plants, what structure containing DNA is transported from one plant to another?
Several interchangeable parts are used in the manufacture of automobiles. Some examples of these parts are batteries, windshield wiper blades, spark plugs, and tires. Which of the following is an advantage of interchangeable parts over non-interchangeable parts on automobiles?
Which of the following represents a chemical reaction?
When a hammer strikes a nail, the nail
Which of these natural events occurs at time intervals that are the most regular?
A student combined rice cereal with melted marshmallows. Which best describes what the student made?
Brittany pedaled her bicycle quickly on a level surface. When she stopped pedaling and coasted, the bicycle slowed and came to a stop. What happened to the energy of the moving bicycle as it coasted to a stop?
Homes that are built to be environmentally friendly because they use energy more efficiently than other homes are called "green" homes. "Green" homes often have reflective roofs and walls made of recycled materials. The windows in these energy-saving homes are double-paned, meaning each window has two pieces of glass. Double-paned windows have a layer of air between the window panes. This layer is a barrier against extreme temperatures and saves energy. A solar panel on a "green" home uses
Which process occurs when rocks and soil slide down a mountain?
Tony is studying ladybugs in a garden. Which of these would BEST help Tony to count the spots on a ladybug?
Which is a physical property of an apple?
Repeated pesticide use on an insect population can result in some of the insects becoming resistant to that pesticide over time. Which process is responsible for the pesticides no longer being effective on the insects?
A boy pulls a sweater off over his head. His hair is attracted to the sweater due to
In some communities, forests are cleared through burning, and the deforested land is used for farming. Which of these is a negative consequence of this practice?
Some plant cells are coated in a waxy layer that prevents water loss. This specialization is found in which plant cells?
Scientists recorded the hourly temperature at a weather station for the month of July and want to quickly measure a trend over time in temperature changes. Which of these formats would be the most appropriate representation of the temperature data to quickly measure any trend?
A factory in Japan had been dumping mercury into Minamata Bay. Certain microorganisms in the water were able to change the mercury into a form that the plankton could use. Which most likely happened next?
Students conducted an investigation with green bananas. They hypothesized that an onion placed near a banana could increase the rate at which the banana ripened. They placed one onion and one banana in each of three containers. In a fourth container they placed a banana, but no onion. Which statement best explains why the onion was left out of the fourth container?
When cold weather freezes water in the cracks of rocks, which would most likely happen?
What would best regulate the temperature of an overheated body?
The surface of Earth is constantly changing. Which of these findings provides the best evidence that the crustal surface of Earth has changed over time?
Solar radiation is a combination of light with different wavelengths. Which type of ray can harm human skin the most?
Water is often put through a treatment system before it is used in homes as drinking water. Which is the most likely reason water is treated before people drink it?
How can plants most likely improve air quality?
A condition in bees called "colony collapse disorder" occurs when worker bees leave the hive to collect nectar and never return. How would a decline in the bee population most likely affect a farm ecosystem?
How are animals that prey on other animals classified?
Which process will separate the sugar from a mixture of sugar and water?
Which movement of carbon between reservoirs takes the longest to achieve?
Which types of objects are most easily seen by the human eye?
Planting legumes in order to add nitrogen to soil most likely causes
Earth is about 81 times more massive than the Moon. How will the mass and weight of a rocket on the Moon compare to its mass and weight on Earth?
Louis Pasteur discovered a process that allows milk to be stored in sealed containers for long periods of time without spoiling. The process, called pasteurization, involves heating the milk before placing it in the sealed containers.Which is the best explanation of how pasteurization works?
Which characteristic would best help a land animal survive in a cold Arctic climate?
What is the most reasonable explanation for why a toy car rolls farther on a wood floor than on a thick carpet?
What part of the scientific method involves measuring the growth of a plant over a one-month period?
Which statement on a toothpaste package best supports the claim of fighting cavities?
Which is a chemical compound?
Which of these human activities in a forest has a positive effect on the ecosystem?
Which is an example of water condensing?
Gregor Mendel studied ratios related to traits passed from parent pea plants to offspring pea plants. Mendel used large numbers of plants to avoid "sampling error." This changed the way scientists studied genetics because it included ideas of
What season is the Northern Hemisphere experiencing when it is tilted directly toward the Sun?
Which species have been on the Earth for the shortest amount of time?
Which tool should be used to compare the growth of an algal colony growing in a petri dish?
Use The Periodic Table of the Elements and the information below to answer the question. Magnesium metal (Mg) is grayish-white in color and reacts actively with water. Fluorine (F2) is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature and is a member of the halogen family. These two elements react to produce magnesium fluoride (MgF2), a chemical commonly used in making windows and lenses. How do the elements magnesium (Mg) and fluorine (F2) produce the compound magnesium fluoride (MgF2)?
Male barn swallow birds with symmetrically-shaped wings find mates more quickly than males with asymmetrical wing shapes. Which statement best explains the significance of symmetry in the barn swallow population?
Which of the following would be most useful for calculating the density of a rock sample?
Which object in our solar system reflects light and is a satellite that orbits around one planet?
Students stir salt, sand, sawdust, and seashells into a jar filled with water. Which of the materials will form a solution?
Which scale is used to report the intensity of an earthquake?
What is the outermost structure in a plant cell?
The main source of food for a coyote population in one area is mice. Which is most likely to happen to these coyotes if a new predator begins eating the mice?
The best example of heat transfer by convection is when
A worker needs to load a heavy box onto a truck. The worker uses a ramp to move the box because the ramp
A fox grows thicker fur as a season changes. This adaptation helps the fox to
What is the main source of raw material for the production of plastics?
The students in an engineering class built a robot that stacks wooden blocks. A built-in computer controls the movement of the robot. The computer in the robot performs a function most similar to which part of the human body?
When sugar is heated on a hot plate, it turns into a liquid. When the liquid sugar is cooled, a hard-crystalline substance is formed. This model best demonstrates the formation of
Which distance is the smallest for which it is most practical to use the light-year as a unit of measurement?
Which of the following devices relies on electromagnetic radiation in the radio wave region of the spectrum for operation?
When a tree suffers from a decreased ability to transport materials within the phloem, what is directly impacted?
Strontium, barium, and radium are grouped together on the Periodic Table of the Elements because they all have
An example of a poor health habit is
What type of inheritance controls blood types in humans?
Minerals can be identified using hardness, streak, and cleavage because
What is the process that produces energy in the Sun for billions of years?
Which statement is an opinion?
Decomposers are organisms that obtain their food from dead organisms. Which of these would be classified as decomposers?
DNA molecules contain the genetic information that determines the characteristics of a living organism. How do DNA molecules express the genetic information they contain?
Fossil fuels were formed from
Which of the following remains constant in Earth's carbon cycle?
Which invention has technology that helps people keep food fresh for a long period of time?
A student is designing a model of the solar system and writing a report. She is trying to be as accurate as possible. Which statement should she include in her report?
Stacey picks apples and puts them in a basket. When she puts her basket on a scale, the scale reads two kilograms (kg). What property is Stacey measuring?
Which feature is a physical property of copper?
Which term describes Earth's orbit around the Sun?
How do the waxy stem covering and needle-shaped leaves improve the ability of a cactus to survive in the desert?
Which characteristic of a cell membrane allows it to control materials entering and leaving a cell?
Which statement about all living organisms is true?
The length of daylight changes as the seasons change during the year. What causes these changes in daylight?
The populations of black rhinoceroses have been impacted by human interactions to the point of being endangered. Which interaction best explains why the black rhino is now endangered?
A student had a cup of ice while working outside. After a while, the ice melted because the Sun emits energy in the form of light and
What characteristic of viruses distinguishes them from cells?
The energy required to lift an object is supplied by ATP derived from the breakdown of molecules of
Living cells synthesize long chains of amino acids called proteins. Which substance provides the information needed to correctly sequence the amino acids during protein synthesis?
Which of these makes it possible for hurricanes to form?
Most types of cacti survive the dry conditions of a desert because they hold water in their stems. This is an example of
High-altitude cirrus clouds are primarily formed from which substance?
During a lab investigation a scientist heats a solid substance. The scientist observes that the solid has two different melting points. The scientist is able to separate the two resulting liquids. Which statement best classifies the original solid substance?
Over a long period of time, some flowering plants have become dependent on honey bees to fertilize their seeds. In recent years, a form of mite has infected and killed the honey bees in many areas of the country. Since this has happened, the once bee-dependent plants with the best chance of surviving are those that
Which landforms are most like hills but are much taller?
What is the basic unit of life?
About how many Earth days does it take the Moon to travel around Earth?
Students studying the atmosphere want to display the percentage of each greenhouse gas as compared to the total amount of greenhouse gases found in the atmosphere. Which representation would be most appropriate for displaying these percentages?
The Himalayan Mountain chain is the youngest and tallest mountain chain on Earth. Which phenomenon contributed most to this area of continental buildup?
A large cold front is moving past the school on a hot, humid summer day. Which best describes the type of weather as the cold front passes by?
Growth and repair in multicellular organisms are the result of
A girl signals her friend by shining a flashlight on a mirror. Her friend can see the signal because
If a wooded area is cleared and corn is planted, what will MOST likely happen?
Warm water contains less dissolved oxygen than colder water. Which population will be most affected by a long period of hot, dry days?
Which of the following is most responsible for the decay of dead organisms?
When a book is dropped onto a wooden desk, the molecules in the wood begin to vibrate from the force of the book. Which of these is produced by the vibrations?
In 1976, the Viking I Lander was sent to Mars to analyze atmospheric gases and soil samples. The Viking I Lander was most likely a
Which action forms a different chemical substance?
Why do dogs have most of the characteristics of their parents?
Which describes a specific characteristic necessary for survival in the desert?
Frogs lay eggs that develop into tadpoles and then into adult frogs. This sequence of changes is an example of how living things
Quartz and feldspar are two common minerals. When they are found mixed together in nature they form
Atoms of which of these elements are part of many organic molecules?
Which object is the best conductor of electricity?
An element with which property would be best to use in electrical wiring?
A large rock breaks into small pieces within 10 years. Which process is most likely responsible for breaking the large rock into small pieces within 10 years?
Paco throws a ball. What force pulls the ball down toward the ground?
Which is a unit of measure for length?
Movement of Earth's crust along plate boundaries produces
The praying mantis is well camouflaged in its natural habitat. What is a benefit of this adaptation?
The Greek philosopher Aristotle described matter with the phrase "unable to be divided." The modern concept that grew from Aristotle's idea is the
Paleontologists often find and study the remains of ancient plants and animals. When the remains of ancient plants and animals are covered by layers of sediment over time, the remains
What are the basic structural units of living organisms?
A student is visiting a local limestone quarry and finds fossils of seashells. The quarry is located hundreds of miles from the ocean. The fossils best indicate that
What happens to metal railroad tracks during the heat of a summer day?
Jake is testing how light affects plant growth. He grows two plants in identical pots with the same amount of water and fertilizer. Jake grows one of the plants in the sun, and the other in the shade. Which part of Jake's process indicates that there is a control for this investigation?
Which stage of a frog's life cycle can be compared to a plant seed growing into a new plant?
Which of these elements is likely to be found in an organic compound?
What statement describes what happens to the carbon dioxide waste produced by a developing baby during pregnancy?
Which part of the atom has a negative charge?
Which is a learned behavior?
Organisms that reproduce asexually generally have offspring that are
Crows are found throughout many parts of the world. They are black birds with excellent hearing. In the wild they live for six to seven years. Some crows in Japan open hard-shelled nuts by dropping them in front of moving cars. Which of these is a learned behavior?
Which object would best help a student determine if a block of an unknown material is magnetic?
About how much of Earth's surface is covered by oceans?
Sound will not travel in a
What supplies most of the energy that plants need to make food?
Which of the following is the main role of flowers found on most flowering plants?
Which adaptation will warn predators not to eat an animal?
The cones of a jack pine tree require great amounts of heat to release their seeds. When are jack pine tree seeds most likely released?
When a thin slice from an onion is viewed through a microscope, lots of little box-like shapes are seen. These shapes are most likely
Which is an example of substances reacting chemically?
An object's hardness, taste, and texture are examples of
Some objects conduct electricity. Which object is the best conductor of electricity?
Which of the following eras is known as the "Age of Mammals"?
In Alaska, there are fewer hours of daylight in the winter than in the summer. Which statement best explains why this difference occurs?
Most of Earth's major earthquakes are caused by
A girl with long hair is going to be participating in an experiment that uses an alcohol burner for an energy source. What is the best thing for her to do to prepare for this experiment?
Which factor would have the greatest influence on the southern migration of animals living in the Northern Hemisphere?
What carries oxygen throughout the body?
Which is the best example of an inherited behavior?
What do all animals need in order to survive?
Estella spilled tomato sauce on her shirt. When she washed her shirt, she noticed that the detergent she used contained enzymes. Enzymes are added to detergents to break down proteins from food and other substances that may stain clothing. Which would most likely inhibit the ability of the enzymes to remove the stain on her shirt?
Which of the following best describes an atom?
At a weightlifting competition, two competitors lifted the same weight to the same height. The second competitor accomplished the lift 2 seconds faster than the first competitor. This demonstrated that the second competitor had more
The fur color of a bear varies with its environment. Polar bears found in the Arctic have white fur, while black bears found in Pennsylvania have dark fur. Which best describes the variation of fur color amongst the bear species?
A car has a small gasoline engine combined with a battery-powered electric motor. When the car stops at a red light, the gasoline engine stops running and the electric motor begins working. How does this type of car most likely benefit people?
Increased populations can lead to the depletion of locally available resources. Compared to other communities, which of these locally available resources is most likely to be depleted in desert communities?
Where is the first place a scientist should present new research data about the structure of a galaxy in order to receive the most appropriate review of the research?
Which action most likely causes large rocks to become smaller pieces of rock?
European starlings are birds that take over the nests of other birds. When they move into an area, starlings reproduce quickly. Taking over the nests of other birds most likely increases the number of starlings by helping them to do what?
Many bacteria are decomposer organisms. Which of the following statements best describes how these bacteria help make soil more fertile?
In Rutherford's experiment, what caused some high-energy particles to bounce off the metal, while most pass straight through?
Jenny's class made an instrument to measure air pressure. The instrument is a
Condensation in the water cycle can best be described as the result of water vapor
New carpet is being measured for a room that is 5.5 m by 4.6 m. On a measuring tape, what is the smallest unit that is necessary to measure the room accurately for the carpet?
How does an ecosystem benefit when leaves fall from a tree and decompose on the soil?
Which of the following gases do plants use in photosynthesis?
During an ice age, enormous ice sheets called glaciers increase in size on Earth's surface, resulting in decreased ocean depths. Due to global cooling, the water cycle is disrupted between which two stages to cause an increase in glacier size?
Different units of measurement are more useful in some settings than in others. Which unit of measurement is most used when comparing distances within the solar system?
The formation of diamonds requires tremendous pressure that is generated
What characteristic helps a rabbit survive in a winter environment?
A science class is taking a field trip to a forest to observe and study birds. Which tool would be most helpful for observing birds?
An example of an instinct is
During which change of state do the particles of a substance move from being tightly packed together to having more freedom of movement?
When astronauts walked on the Moon, they used weighted boots to help them walk due to the lower gravitational pull. What difference between Earth and the Moon accounts for the difference in gravity?
A population of wood mice lives in a cool, moist temperate forest. Several years of hot, dry weather have affected the plants in the area. Which mice in the population are most likely to survive this change and pass their genes on to their offspring?
Harmful ultraviolet rays from the Sun are primarily absorbed by
Which of these is most likely caused by the action of water, wind, and animals?
The core of Earth is divided into two layers. The outer core is made of
Offshore oil platforms affect ocean habitats. An ocean environment is most likely damaged by an offshore oil platform because
An object such as a hammer weighs less on the Moon than on Earth. This is because the Moon has a
A scientist plans a project to determine the effect of rain on the formation of caves. An area of rock has been chosen as the site for the investigation. How often should the scientist measure the changes in the rock?
Which type of rock is formed from limestone that has been compacted, heated, and recrystallized?
Isabel goes jogging for two miles on a sunny afternoon. At the end of her run, she is warmer. As Isabel jogs, which function does the skin perform to help stabilize her body temperature?
Which cell can survive without the help of other cells?
Two students make hot chocolate. One student pours the hot chocolate into a foam cup. The other student pours the hot chocolate into a metal cup. The metal cup becomes too hot to touch, but the foam cup can be held comfortably. The best explanation for this difference in temperature is that the foam cup-- A heats up much faster than the metal cup
Frogs and salamanders compete with each other for insects. Both frogs and salamanders catch flying insects with their tongues. Which feature would most likely help both animals compete for flying insects?
Which interaction benefits both organisms?
Which type of rock is formed when limestone is subjected to heat and pressure?
Jenny measures the outside temperature as 16 degrees Celsius (°C), 61 degrees Fahrenheit (°F). She observes precipitation falling from the clouds in a solid form. What type of precipitation is Jenny most likely observing?
A change in the environment that causes a response is known as a
Aluminum is an element. Which of the following best describes the smallest particle of aluminum that retains all the properties of aluminum?
What advantage do sea stars gain from having radial symmetry?
A student has a ball of clay that sinks when placed in a pan of water. Which property should he change to make the clay float?
The population of which of the following 26 organisms would most likely decline if small animals like rats, rabbits, and snakes were eliminated from an ecosystem?
During a lab investigation, students were asked to determine the best way to clean up an oil spill using different materials. Investigation Materials • filter paper • foam sponge • metal wire screen • thin sock filled with hair The students tested the materials by placing each material into separate buckets containing oil and water. They recorded their observations on which material absorbed the most oil. Why would the students' teacher ask them to repeat their tests?
A delta can be seen from the air at the mouth of the Mississippi River. This delta was formed by
The nose, mouth, and diaphragm are parts of which body system?
Students are studying some leaves. They group the leaves by shape. Which science process are the students using when they put the leaves in different groups?
The thin, semi-permeable membrane that encloses a cell allows nutrients to enter and wastes to be
A small, fast-moving river in is in a V-shaped valley on the slope of a mountain. If you follow the river to where it passes through a plain, what will the river most likely look like compared with how it looked on the mountain?
The atmosphere of Mars is almost entirely composed of a greenhouse gas. Compared with Earth, which factor accounts for the low, nighttime surface temperatures on Mars?
Asexually produced offspring are genetically
A teacher asks her students to examine titles of four scientific articles. Which titled article is specifically about a chemical change?
Nuclear fusion is the source of energy for stars. Besides hydrogen, which other element is most likely also common in stars?
Plants in a forest need to obtain nutrients from the soil to survive. How do most of the nutrients get back in the soil once the forest plants have used them for growth?
Conjugation in a paramecium differs from sexual reproduction in volvox because conjugation
Which of the following helps to produce urine in humans and other mammals?
A scientist looks at a graph that shows the percentages of humus, clay, and sand that make up a soil. If the scientist had the total weight of each material, instead of percentages, what type of graph would be best to illustrate the data?
Which unit of measurement describes an object's length?
Which organ is part of the respiratory system?
The iron in iron-rich red soils may not be in a form that can be taken up by tree roots. As a result, leaves and needles may look yellow. Some trees release acids that convert iron in soil to a usable form. This change in soil chemistry is a type of which process?
The action that results when waves made in a pond strike the edges and bounce back is known as
Sleet and hail are forms of
Astronomers have determined the surface temperature of stars by studying their colors. What color emission represents stars with the hottest temperatures?
Because sulfur cannot be decomposed by simple chemical methods into two or more different substances, it is classified as
The students watch ocean waves crash on a beach. Which statement describes what will most likely happen because of the waves?
When plants and animals die, which organisms help return nutrients to the food chain?
Which object used in an experiment can safely be recycled?
Evidence that living things have evolved over hundreds of millions of years can be found in
What causes the blue color of the sky?
As the population of small fish in a lake decreases, the population of large fish that depend on the small fish for food will
Living organisms require energy for biological processes. Chemical energy in a plant cell is
Pollen is necessary for a flowering plant to
Which gas makes up the greatest percentage of Earth's atmosphere?
Which is the best explanation of the term ecology?
A student leaves a rock in the Sun on a bright afternoon. An hour after sunset, the weather is cool, but the rock still feels warm. The student has demonstrated a property of the rock resulting directly from which of the rock's other properties?
Which characteristic is not an inherited trait?
Eating leafy vegetables is important for human health. This is because leafy vegetables are a good source of which of the following?
What is necessary to use on a telescope in order to photograph solar flares and solar prominences?
Near Earth's equator, water generally exists naturally in the liquid and gas states. In which other part of Earth is water usually found naturally in only two states?
A cat jumps when startled by a loud noise. This is an example of an organism
Which of the following materials would best slow the transfer of heat?
What can cause a moving object to increase its speed in a forward direction?
In which oceanic zone do clams and crabs survive by burrowing in the sand?
A manufacturing industry has asked to relocate its plant to your town. From an environmental perspective, which question is least important to ask before deciding whether the industry may move to your town?
Some meteorologists use visual aids such as diagrams, maps, and charts when they present the weather to television viewers. How do different types of visual aids help the viewers understand complex weather phenomena?
Which renewable energy resource possesses the greatest potential for providing renewable energy to meet the future needs of the southern United States?
A student performs an experiment and the results are shown below: Before- Iron filings are brown, small, and magnetic: Copper sulfate crystals are blue, brittle, and not magnetic. After- The copper formed was reddish, solid, and not magnetic: Iron sulfide solution was colorless and not magnetic. Which statement supports that a chemical reaction took place?
In order for rocks to be classified as igneous, the rocks must
Which of these is most likely the cause of a father and son having almost identical-sounding voices?
Frog eggs hatch into tadpoles, and then tadpoles gradually develop into frogs. This process is known as
Many people like to use microwave ovens rather than traditional ovens. The main reason for this is that microwave ovens
When trees are removed from an area in a tropical rainforest, the area experiences an increase in soil erosion. Which statement best explains why removing the trees can lead to soil erosion?
What information is needed to calculate the speed of a car?
Freda always hangs her wet swimsuit outdoors after getting out of the swimming pool. Which of the following is least likely to affect the rate at which Freda's swimsuit dries?
Maria collected the gas given off by a glowing piece of charcoal. The gas was then bubbled through a small amount of colorless limewater. Part of Maria's report stated, "After the gas was put into the jar, the limewater gradually changed to a milky white color." This statement is
Some butterflies live an average of two weeks. This period of time is called a life
Which two body systems work together to transport oxygen to the cells?
Some localized layers of rock contain the element iridium. Iridium is most often found in space objects such as meteoroids and asteroids. The discovery of these iridium-containing layers has been matched to which phenomena in Earth's history?
Which of these converts electrical energy to light energy?
Darwin's theory that animal species can change over time was inspired by his research on which set of islands?
An athlete is running a race. The athlete's body needs energy. Which organelle(s) in the athlete's cells supply the energy for cellular functions?
Which of these would best help a scientist discover a new planet?
Which of these lists has only products that come from plants?
Why is some food dehydrated for astronauts to eat in space?
Perfume sprayed from a bottle spreads more easily in a warm room of 25°C than in a cool room of 15°C. Which of the following correctly compares perfume molecules at 25°C to those at 15°C?
Which of the following is believed to be one cause of global warming?
What product was being formed as plants died and sank to the bottom of swamps?
What is the approximate length of time it takes the Moon to complete one lunar cycle?
A line graph is best used when the measured variable is
All living things need energy to survive. What is the primary source of energy for all living things?
If a chemical reaction such as photosynthesis begins with 6 atoms of carbon [C], how many atoms of carbon [C] should be in the products?
Which object refracts light?
A gastroenterologist is a doctor who treats problems of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. Which organ system is cared for by this type of doctor?
Which event becomes more likely during a drought in a prairie ecosystem?
When scientists publish papers describing the results and conclusions of their experiments, members of the scientific community should
Kim lost her hammer outside. When she found it a few months later, some parts of the metal were covered with flaky, brown rust. Which type of change occurred when rust formed on the hammer?
Which human activity has most negatively affected air quality?
Most of the bacteria in a forest ecosystem are best classified as which of the following types of organisms?
A pencil falls off of a desk. What moves the pencil toward the floor?
All of the processes listed below cause changes in Earth's surface. Which of the following is the slowest to change Earth's surface?
A group of students was preparing an activity to determine whether certain materials will float or sink when placed on water. Before the experiment started, one student said, "I think the sponge will float." This statement was
What tool is used to determine the mass of an object?
According to the Periodic Table of the Elements, mercury (Hg) is different from other metals because mercury is
When using more than the recommended amounts of pesticide on farmland, yards, and gardens, what is most likely to occur?
According to the fossil record, when did episodes of rapid speciation commonly take place?
A deer inherits some of its features from its parents. Other features come from its environment. Which feature would a deer most likely inherit from its parents?
What is the smallest structural and functional unit of the nervous system?
Male peacocks have large brightly colored tail feathers. What is the most likely reason for this?
In a city, the daily high and low 16 temperatures for a month are best represented by which of the following?
Drew was measuring the growth of a vine that can grow almost 31 cm a day. Which would be the best way to record his data of the growth over a period of a day?
All of the following are functions of a cell membrane except
Which characteristic will a baby chimpanzee inherit from its parents?
Which object is the best conductor of electricity?
Why are some rocks smoother and rounder than others?
A vaccine can prevent a serious disease. When a new vaccine is developed, it is given to a small group of people. Why would it be important to test each vaccine on a small group of people before everyone can have one?
When can producers make the most food?
Plants have special tissues that transport food, water, and minerals throughout the plant. What are these tissues similar to in animals?
Which of the following statements best explains how the decomposition of plant and animal matter helps to form rich soils?
Beans and coal both have stored energy. Where did the energy come from that is stored in beans and coal?
A metal ball has a constant velocity of zero. Which other quantity must also be zero?
What geographic obstacle causes water to condense in an air mass as the air mass moves?
If an object is attracted to a magnet, the object is most likely made of
Which explains the pattern of day and night?
Which is the best plan to make the fossil fuel supply last longer?
The stages of evolution of a star are determined by the mass of the star at the beginning of its life cycle. Which stage of evolution is the oldest form of a massive star?
Which of these best indicates that sediments can be changed into rock?
Carbon cycles through several Earth subsystems. Which sequence most directly leads to the cycling of carbon that can result in the formation of petroleum?
Which word best describes the speed of a cart that has a positive velocity and a negative acceleration?
A hurricane is a heat engine which converts one kind of energy into another. Hurricanes convert most of the heat energy into
Which of the following is a crucial piece of evidence supporting scientists' theory of how the continents and the ocean basins formed?
What motion causes day and night?
The axis of Earth is tilted at an angle of 23.5° from the vertical position. Which of the following is the main result of this tilt?
In an earthquake, the primary waves move through
Which of the following is the major cause of tides?
A dog opens its mouth and lets its tongue hang out. A human's body produces sweat. These are two ways that organisms may adjust to
Fires in forests from lightning rid the forest of dead branches and leaves. If the trees survive and the soil remains intact, the forest will experience regrowth to its climax state by which process?
A class planted trees and shrubs in an empty dirt lot beside the school. The roots of the plants can help protect the soil. The soil is most likely being protected from what?
In the process of photosynthesis, sunlight is converted into
Vascular plants have tissue called xylem. Which of these is transported by the xylem?
If Lisa wants to experiment with bean plants, which of these is the best example of a hypothesis?
A jeweler melts gold to make jewelry. As the gold melts, the mass
Which of the following tools is most useful for tightening a small mechanical fastener?
Oil, coal, and natural gas are fossil fuels formed under what conditions?
Some birds build nests in the spring. This nest building is a seasonal adaptation that occurs to help the birds
Which tool is used to measure the volume of a liquid?
The functions of a plant's roots are to support the plant and
All of the inherited traits that are passed to offspring during asexual reproduction come from a single
What energy transformation occurs when an electric lamp is turned on?
Which phase change in the atmosphere forms clouds?
Where are the most reactive nonmetals located on the periodic table?
Who was a leading authority on continental drift in the early 1900s?
In addition to oxygen, which gases make up the largest percentage of Earth's atmosphere?
For many years, people have been curious about the stars. In the past, people have shared what they knew about the stars through stories and drawings. Which pair of tools would be most helpful for people today to gather and share information about stars?
During a presentation on astronomy, Professor Williams discussed various measurements in space. Which objects was she referring to when she talked about how astronomical units (AU) were determined?
As more people have moved to the beach, the sea turtle population has decreased. Which is most likely the cause of this decrease?
The skin of a chameleon can change colors to help it blend with its surroundings. How would this adaptation most likely help a chameleon survive?
A student examines a new watch design. The watch has a small solar cell on its face. The main function of the solar cell is to
The presence of which of the following geological features provides the best evidence that glaciers once covered an area?
Which of these is a way the people of Virginia can help restore a natural ecosystem?
A student wants to figure out how many calories are needed to perform various activities. A list of some everyday activities is made, and the number of calories burned during each activity is recorded. Which method is the best way for the student to display and evaluate the information?
Sedimentary deposits formed from organic material tend to include a high amount of
According to the Big Bang Theory, which element most likely formed first?
Tim and Carla play catch with a ball. Which term describes the motion of a ball?
Which set of equipment would be best to use when investigating what is found in a sample of pond water?
The Theory of Plate Tectonics revolutionized scientific thought because it
How does repeating an experiment improve the likelihood of obtaining accurate results?
One hundred grams of water and 100 grams of vegetable oil are heated in identical containers at 70°C for 5 minutes. Their temperatures at the end of 5 minutes are different due to the difference in which property?
There are MORE hours of sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere during which season?
Which force produces energy as heat?
Biologists have discovered that the beluga whales of Canada's St. Lawrence River have the highest rates of cancer among animals. What is most likely the reason for this high incidence of cancer in these whales?
Reading from left to right, elements in the same period on the Periodic Table of the Elements
A device that converts light energy into electricity used in many handheld calculators is a
Which most accurately describes a circle (pie) graph?
Which organisms benefit in the relationship between bees and flowering plants?
The orbit of Earth is almost circular and has a period of about 365 days. Compared to the orbit of Earth, which of these objects usually have highly elliptical orbits and can have periods of over 1000 years?
How is the theory of plate tectonics different from a hypothesis regarding a certain aspect of plate movement?
A large quantity of heavy rain falling in a short time period will most likely
An artificial pacemaker is a device that regulates the beat of the heart by an electrical stimulus. Some early pacemakers were powered by batteries and were worn externally with wires passing through the skin to the surface of the heart. Modern pacemakers are now much smaller and are implanted surgically. Which most likely has increased the lifespan and effectiveness of artificial pacemakers?
A balloon filled with helium gas is set free and starts to move upward. Which of the following best explains why the helium balloon moves upward?
Oscar and Andre used a microscope to observe a sample of pond water and drew an example of each type of organism they saw. Then they compared their drawings. They discovered that their drawings of a euglena and a paramecium were alike, but their amoeba drawings had very different shapes. What are two things that Oscar's amoeba could have been doing that made his drawing look different from Andre's?
The reading on a barometer rises when the air
Which of the following processes is responsible for changing liquid water into water vapor?
In an atom, protons plus neutrons make up the atom's
A generator converts mechanical energy to electrical energy by using a conducting metal loop turning in a
Deer live in forest for shelter. If the forest was cut down, which situation would most likely happen?
Which physical property is important to have in a material used in cookware?
Which sentence describes a characteristic of offspring produced by sexual reproduction?
What is involved in creating genetically modified bacteria?
Which of the following structures does a frog develop as it changes from a tadpole to an adult frog?
One cause of heat in a car engine is caused by friction between parts. Which of these reduces the amount of heat produced by friction?
The primary functions of the digestive system are to break down food, absorb nutrients and excrete wastes. Once food is absorbed, what system is responsible for carrying the nutrients to the body cells?
If you breathe on a mirror, part of the mirror clouds up. What are you actually seeing when you see the mirror cloud up?
The surface of the Moon is made up of
Which sequence correctly shows the levels of increasing organization in the human body?
Which layer of the atmosphere contains the greatest amount of water vapor?
What should a scientist do to help make sure the results of an experiment are unbiased?
Which property of water allows it to dissolve many different substances?
Nevada is much drier than regions in California that are at the same latitude. Compared to these regions in California, which feature of Nevada contributes most to this dry climate?
A chemist observed bubbling and fizzing after adding an acid solution to a white powdery substance in a beaker. Which of the following can be inferred?
Which of the following is visible through a reflecting telescope?
A student is using hydrochloric acid in an investigation. Which piece of safety equipment is most important during this investigation?
Generally, the deeper rock layers of Earth are older than shallower rock layers. How can the collision of two tectonic plates change the order of the rock layers?
Which instrument should a student use to best examine bacteria?
Matter that is vibrating is producing ___.
Falling and rising air and water molecules inside of clouds are believed to be factors in the formation of lightning. Which kind of energy transfer is taking place to cause this weather phenomenon?
Sleet, rain, snow, and hail are forms of
A windstorm knocks down many trees in a national park. Timber companies want to get rid of the fallen trees. How would this most likely harm the park ecosystem?
A plant has yellow flowers. What best explains why the flowers are yellow?
Which tool is used to determine the mass of an object?
Prairie dogs can run very quickly. This adaptation enables the prairie dog to
A student has a liquid that does not mix with water. To predict whether the liquid will float on water or sink beneath it, which tools should be used to examine the liquid?
Samuel investigated the effect of temperature on the growth of snapdragons. He recorded the results from the investigation and found that snapdragons do not grow well in low temperatures. What is the purpose of this conclusion in the scientific process?
Which of the following best describes the purpose of cellular respiration?
In a meadow ecosystem, mice receive most of the energy they need to survive directly from which of the following sources?
Which environmental stimulus causes leaves on certain trees to change color in autumn?
How does the length of daylight in New York State change from summer to fall?
What is the name of the product formed from the reaction shown below? 4Fe(III) + 3O_{2} -> 2Fe_{2}O_{3}
What type of galaxy is the Milky Way?
One thing that all human cells have in common is that they
Which two systems of the body are interacting when a runner sprains his ankle?
Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system. It rotates on its axis once about every 10 hours. What time period on Earth would be 10 hours long if Earth rotated on its axis once every 10 hours?
The elements sulfur (S) and oxygen (O2) combine to form a substance called sulfur dioxide (SO2). Sulfur dioxide is also formed when coal and oil are burned. Sulfur dioxide can best be described as
Which is a major difference between the life cycles of different types of plants?
Sunlight passes through the windows of a car and causes the car seats to get hot. Which type of energy flow is involved in heating the seats?
When a large oak tree is cut down in a forest, it leaves a gap in the forest canopy which allows smaller trees to quickly grow in the available sunlight. Which interaction is best represented among the smaller trees?
How long does it take for the Moon to rotate on its axis?
What is one way that humans can maintain good health?
Which is an example of a group of cells with a common structure and function?
Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disease caused by an autosomal recessive gene. If each parent carries one sickle cell allele, what are the chances that their child will have sickle cell anemia?
Which statement describes animal embryos?
The average temperature of the surface of Earth has increased approximately 1°C in the past century. Which reason best explains this increase in temperature?
As the population in an area grows, water usage increases. Eventually, water usage can outstrip the supply. Which measure to increase the amount of available water demonstrates the best stewardship of the resource?
Which action illustrates a chemical change?
Which tool could be used to help someone count the number of ladybugs on a leaf?
Which two activities use most of the water used in an average U.S. household?
Which are the best tools to use for growing and studying bacterial cultures?
Which effect would the growing of legume crops such as beans and soybeans have?
Which relationship between Earth's outer core and inner core generates a large portion of Earth's magnetic field?
Which order of succession of natural communities would most likely occur in New York State?
White light can be separated into all of its component colors by
An Italian scientist named Alessandro Volta invented the Voltaic pile in 1800. It was able to produce a steady electrical current. Based on this description, what is the modern equivalent of the Voltaic pile?
Which would cause the most soil to erode from a river bank in just a few days?
A student is measuring a liquid in a graduated cylinder. The student is not tall enough to read the measurement at eye level. Which of these is the best action for the student to take to read the measurement correctly?
When Isaac Newton theorized that gravity caused objects to fall to the ground, he had also discovered the force that causes
A disorder is associated with certain flaws in the human respiratory system. Which is most likely a typical symptom of this disorder?
Which of these is the main contributor to the formation of hurricanes?
Which statement correctly describes why there are fewer than 24 hours of daylight in Alaska during each day in April?
What best describes objects orbiting in the Kuiper Belt?
Coal was made from the remains of which ancient ecosystem?
Which of these describes a location where minerals are most likely to form?
In 1971, the bones of an extinct flying dinosaur were discovered. This kind of discovery helps everyone learn more about
Which could be a possible way to prevent wildlife species from becoming endangered?
The chemical reaction of ethane and oxygen produces carbon dioxide and water. Which is the best form to identify reactants and products of the reaction?
Rheumatoid arthritis is a disease that occurs when the body attacks its own tissues. Which body system becomes disordered first?
Variation in which property between water at different temperatures contributes most to the formation of horizontal ocean layers having distinct temperatures?
Which event would most likely cause a rapid extinction of organisms?
When an octopus feels threatened, it can release black ink into the water. The ink MOST likely helps the octopus
Which is a way the agricultural biotechnology industry could have a positive impact on the environment?
The following statements are from an article in a fitness magazine. Which of these is an opinion?
Which pair of items will repel each other?
In your body, what two organs work together to make sure that oxygen gets to all the other organs of your body?
Each organ in the digestive system has a specific function. During digestion, food passes from the stomach into the small intestine. Which statement best describes what takes place in the small intestine?
Which structure is found in producers in nearly all ecosystems?
A strawberry farmer finds that, after a hard freeze, some of his strawberries are still alive. Which best explains why these strawberries were able to survive?
Which event would most likely result in more food for organisms that are scavengers?
When you are riding a bicycle at night, your bicycle's reflectors help people in cars see your bicycle. How do bicycle reflectors work?
From Earth, the Sun appears brighter than any other star because the Sun is the
Scientists found fish fossils in the desert. What do the fossils tell about this environment when the fish were alive?
Chinese and European societies can use different but effective technologies when addressing medical questions. What does this demonstrate?
The exotic plant Melaleuca, or Australian Pine, has increased the intensity of fires across the Everglades. The amount of fuel available for fires has increased due to the presence of the Melaleuca. The Melaleuca releases massive numbers of seeds in response to fire, drought, and herbicide damage. Which best describes the reason the Melaleuca has been able to survive?
Water that is used to cool nuclear power plants can be released into water bodies, causing an area called a thermal plume. A thermal plume can be 12-18°C warmer than surrounding waters. Although some fish may be attracted to the warmer water, other organisms may not be able to survive. Government officials order a study to determine the effects of a thermal plume in a water body near a nuclear power plant in North Carolina. Which factor most related to temperature should the study focus on in order to determine whether the thermal plume is damaging the health of the water system?
What is a galaxy?
Which part of a strawberry plant absorbs most of the water needed by the plant?
In cherry tomatoes, red color (R) is dominant to yellow color (r). If two heterozygous plants are crossed, what percentage of the offspring will be yellow?
Which situation is an example of a feedback system in the body that maintains homeostasis?
Which human organ system produces sperm or egg cells?
In the human body the digestion of proteins takes place primarily in which two organs?
What is the source of the organic matter needed for most fertile soils?
A scientist finds the bones of a dinosaur. What could help the scientist determine the approximate age of the dinosaur bones?
A pond is near river but not connected to it. What would most likely allow fish to move from the pond to the river?
A characteristic that all living organisms have in common is they
When the cells in an organism divide and reproduce, the organism can grow. Which cell organelle contains the genetic material for reproduction?
Measurements of carbon dioxide concentrations in the air taken over the past decade have shown a
All matter is made up of particles called
Which of the following energy conversions takes place in a battery-operated flashlight?
Which of these is most likely harmful to an ecosystem?
Which units are best to measure the amount of rain that fell during a thunderstorm?
Noah visited a park that had many oak trees. Which best describes the role of an oak tree in its ecosystem?
Which of these resources will most likely be depleted first?
When athletes begin to exercise, their heart rates and respiration rates increase. At what level of organization does the human body coordinate these functions?
A student heated a pan of soup on a stove. While stirring the soup with a metal spoon, the student noticed the spoon became very warm. What is the most likely reason the spoon became warm?
Where does a landslide begin?
Students are learning about the natural resources in Maryland. One group of students researches information about renewable natural resources in the state. The other group researches information about nonrenewable natural resources in the state. The resources the students investigate include plants, animals, soil, minerals, water, coal, and oil. Aluminum is a nonrenewable natural resource. Which of these methods of aluminum disposal is best for the environment?
Which of the following keeps the planets in our solar system in orbit around the Sun?
Which human organ system primarily exchanges gases between the body and the atmosphere?
Moving water was the most important factor in forming which of these?
Which list contains only nonliving things?
Which type of energy conversion occurs in a flashlight?
Rocks that contain fragments of bones, shells, and plant remains are most likely
Which reaction is endothermic?
Which property of water can cause a rock to break apart?
With a microscope, you see that an object has a cell wall, a chloroplast, and a nucleus. What is being observed?
Which instrument would be best to measure the volume of a liquid?
Which part of an atom is involved in chemical reactions?
Which tool is best used to collect information about the weather?
Which of these characteristics best helps scientists classify organisms?
Which resource is most likely found in large amounts in forest ecosystems?
Which of the following best describes a role of mushrooms in ecosystems?
A gardener wants to increase the ability of garden soil to retain water. Which of these should the gardener add to the soil?
In the life cycle of a fly, which stage comes after the larval stage?
In which example could a thermometer be used to show that heat energy is being transferred?
What is the most likely function of a turtle's hard shell?
What is the main source of energy that causes water to evaporate from the surface of Earth?
Which terms can be used to describe the properties of both a wave and a particle of light?
To use energy from the Sun to power household appliances, the solar energy must be converted to
The yellow-throated longclaw is a bird that lives on the dry savanna of Africa. It looks almost exactly like another bird, the western meadowlark of North America. Although the birds look very similar, they are not even in the same taxonomic family. Scientists think the birds look alike because the two species developed under similar environmental pressures, even though they developed thousands of miles apart. Which process does their development demonstrate?
The reaction that releases energy for use by the cell occurs in which site?
Why do doctors suggest that people get a flu vaccine each year?
Which of the following events involves a consumer and producer in a food chain?
The change from day to night on Earth can be explained by
Which part of a bicycle BEST moves in a circle?
When animals use energy, what is always produced?
Which type of rock is formed when hot lava cools?
Which environmental factor would most likely prevent an orange tree from surviving in the desert?
After a rainstorm, a big pile of rocks blocks part of a mountain road. Which event most likely caused the rocks to move onto the road?
What would be the result of adding one proton to an atom?
What would be the best source to find information about DNA testing?
In what section of Earth do earthquakes happen?
A complete fossil has been found of a type of bird that cannot be identified. What can most likely be determined about the bird from the fossil?
When large areas of the rainforests are cleared and burned, climate can be affected. Which best explains how rainforest destruction can contribute to the greenhouse effect?
Which information is used in a station model?
Which part of a plant is most responsible for using energy from the Sun to produce food for the plant?
Which natural formation is the best example of the result of both constructive and destructive forces such as weathering, erosion, and deposition of sediment?
Which characteristic helps a fox find food?
Tay-Sachs disease is a recessive genetic disorder. If only one gene is present, an individual is a carrier. What is the probability of two healthy Tay-Sachs carriers having a child that has the disease?
Two identical lamps contain the same amount of different types of oil. They are allowed to burn until all the oil has been burned. Which measurement will best provide the total difference in chemical energy between the two oils?
Which disease is a result of abnormal cell division?
During which season of the year would a rabbit's fur be thickest?
Which property of an element is determined by adding the number of protons and number of neutrons?
Which of these cycles takes 24 hours?
Lemon juice turns litmus paper red, is corrosive and tastes sour. Lemon juice is classified as
A child walks across a carpet and generates an electrical charge. The child will get a slight shock by touching a
Which animal eats only plants?
A newborn kangaroo has the ability to crawl into its mother's pouch to drink milk. This is an example of
Which characteristic is shared by Earth and the Moon?
The Piedmont and Coastal Plains regions in Maryland produce crops such as corn, soybeans, wheat, tobacco, tomatoes, and apples. Which environmental factor most likely influences which crops are grown in these regions?
Which organ system is responsible for the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment?
Which of these will always produce a magnetic field?
The periodic table provides information about the atoms of different elements. Which is a characteristic of an atom determines what element it is?
Joel made some measurements and recorded this data: Sample 1 - 45 mL Sample 2 - 15 mL Sample 3 - 30 mL Sample 4 - 20 mL Which of these tools would most likely have been used to obtain these measurements?
A teacher demonstrates a chemical reaction. A student observes that the test tube in which the reaction occurs becomes warm. What is the source of the thermal energy generated by the reaction?
Deer provide food for wolves. How does this relationship also benefit the deer herd?
In what way does society benefit from research on diseases?
Which energy transformation takes place in a gasoline lawn mower?
Which of the following can only be seen with a telescope?
The rocks that form most of the Sierra Nevada are granitic rocks. This means that the mountains were most likely formed by
In 1872, the United States created a national park called Yellowstone. The park includes more than two million acres in the three states of Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. Which statement best explains why national parks have a positive effect on ecosystems?
According to the endosymbiotic theory, double-membrane mitochondria originated as a result of some larger eukaryotic cells with flexible membranes engulfing smaller prokaryotic cells. Which of these explains where the outer layer of the double membrane of the mitochondria originated?
Toni got a cut on her arm while playing in a softball game. A few weeks later, the cut was healed. Which process is most responsible for repairing the cut?
A pot of cold water was heated on a stove until the water boiled. Which of the following best explains why the water was able to boil?
A spring-fed stream forms a pond that contains watercress plants, minnows, and crayfish. The pond receives 5 hours of direct sunlight every day. Which of the following is an abiotic factor in this ecosystem?
A modern theory of the origin of the universe proposes that the first atoms formed were primarily atoms of which element?
A star is a large astronomical body that
What happens to water when it boils?
Ms. Bristol measured the mass of a closed beaker containing several ice cubes. The mass was 100 g. An hour later, after the ice cubes had melted, Ms. Bristol measured the mass of the beaker again. What was the mass of the beaker of water the second time?
A student has two solid samples of the same substance. Which property do the substances most likely have in common?
In which object does chemical energy most likely transform into electrical energy?
What is the mass number of an atom with 17 protons, 17 electrons, and 18 neutrons?
Some machines can remove the salt that is in seawater. How does removing salt from seawater most help people?
Which body system is most affected by a disease that causes the bones to become weak and brittle?
Why can a small fire be put out by placing a heavy blanket over it?
There is a river at the base of Mount Tom. In the spring the water level is usually very high. In the summer it is lower. The higher level of water during the spring comes from
Earthquake waves are recorded by seismograph machines. What does an earthquake wave transmit?
The snowshoe hare was once common in Maryland. In 1986, researchers in the state noted that the snowshoe hare was no longer found in Maryland. Which statement best explains why the snowshoe hare is no longer found in Maryland?
In the initial stages of manned space exploration, scientists needed to address adequate nutrition to provide astronauts with energy throughout the mission. Which of these criteria could not be used when considering food and energy for astronauts during manned space flights?
Which is the best example of evaporation?
In a forest community, trees produce leaves that can be eaten by deer. The leaves also fall to the forest floor during autumn. Fungi break the leaves down into nutrients that enter the soil. What is the decomposer in this forest community?
Compared to Earth, the Moon is
What process forms an image in a mirror?
Which is an example of a physical change?
Which of the following describes an object that must have a net negative charge?
Rocks found on Earth are classified as sedimentary, metamorphic, or igneous based on
Which of the following is formed when two elements combine chemically?
Which of the following is the most important safety practice when using a rock hammer on a geology field trip?
To which organ system do the esophagus, liver, pancreas, small intestine, and colon belong?
When sodium hydroxide reacts with a copper nitrate solution, the reaction vessel needs to be kept on ice to slow down the reaction. What best describes this reaction?
Scientists measured the patterns of spectral lines given off by distant galaxies and concluded that almost all of these galaxies are moving away from Earth. What did the scientists observe directly?
When a multicellular organism is damaged, it will repair itself as
Genes are located on chromosomes which are composed of
Which of the following best describes the number of chromosomes in a normal human liver cell?
A student measures the growth of a group of plants given different amounts of fertilizer. Which data display should the student use to compare the growth of the plants?
What is a large buildup of moving ice and snow called?
Which of these conditions would most likely be shown in the fossil record as a reason for mass extinctions?
One of the functions of a topographic map is to
Reptiles become more active as the day gets warmer. This is because
Which scientific model could be used to predict the properties of an element?
Some of the thermal structure of Earth is the result of a combination of chemical composition, temperature, and pressure. Which is a boundary that best demonstrates a contact point between layers having relatively the same temperature and chemical composition?
A hillside along a highway has exposed layers of undisturbed sedimentary rock. Which method would be best for scientists to use to determine the relative age of these sedimentary rock layers?
What are petri dishes used for in a lab?
How do most fish get the oxygen they need to survive?
Miranda's neighbors have an apple tree in their yard. What is the source of energy for the apple tree?
Some types of trees are able to survive the heat of a forest fire. Which of the following characteristics would best help a tree survive a fire?
Which of the following would most likely happen if grasses and shrubs were removed from a rural Massachusetts ecosystem?
In 2004, Maryland recycled more than 35% of all of the waste the state produced. Which of these benefits does recycling provide to Maryland?
A student finds a round, smooth pebble on a beach. Which action made the pebble smooth?
The position of the liver in the circulatory system maximizes its ability to filter out harmful chemicals as soon as they enter the bloodstream. Blood travels to the liver from the
A student recorded the amount of rain that fell in one year in his city. What is the best way for him to organize his information?
While Anna was testing a circuit, she dropped a light bulb. What is the safest thing Anna can do?
Sugar is added to water and the mixture is stirred. Which observation is evidence that the sugar dissolved in the water?
The direction water flows in a river depends on
A soccer player kicks a soccer ball across a field. Which factor has the most effect on the distance the soccer ball travels?
Many cells have a nucleus that contains chromosomes. These chromosomes carry genes that are composed of
Which items would best protect a group of students while investigating a forest ecosystem?
A student needs to find the mass of an atom. The numbers of which atomic particles determines the mass of the atom?
Which activity is necessary for humans to maintain good health?
A student completes several tasks while making breakfast. During which task does the student make a solution?
Which natural event can dry out plants and cause wildfires?
Where would nitrogen most easily be found in the nitrogen cycle?
Before it rains water must collect in
Which atmospheric phenomena are created by the interaction of charged particles with Earth's magnetosphere?
Which of these BEST describes the way a feather feels?
A tight metal lid on a jar of pickles may loosen when it has been held in hot water. This is because the hot water causes the
A scientist reads about an experiment conducted by a researcher.The scientist conducts the same experiment and collects data but this data contradicts what was published by the researcher. What should the scientist do since the data from the two experiments is contradictory?
The organisms that convert solar energy and raw materials into food are
Large amounts of metals like iron and aluminum are found in
Which of these occurs if myosin fails to bind to actin during muscle contraction?
How are cells able to produce the proteins required by certain conditions?
An organism's cells include organelles and a cell wall. In which taxonomic group or groups might the organism be classified?
Which of these structures produces male gametes in humans?
The length of a year is equivalent to the time it takes for one
Which of these organisms has cells with cell walls?
Which is the result of mitosis?
Which of these materials on the walls of a room would work best to keep sound from making an echo?
The starch and water molecules in potato cells are stored in what organelle?
Which animals live part of their lives in water and part on land, and go through metamorphosis?
A student puts two identical plants in the same type and amount of soil. She gives them the same amount of water. She puts one of these plants near a sunny window and the other in a dark room. This experiment tests how the plants respond to
Humans need food to grow and survive. Food that is not used immediately by the body for energy is
What structure surrounds the cell and regulates materials that enter and leave the cell?
In order for boulders to become sediments, the boulders must first be
During which stage of an insect's life cycle does the female lay eggs?
When a dog smells food and begins drooling, it is responding to an external stimulus. Which of these describes a response to an internal stimulus?
Which is an example of melting?
Students perform an investigation designed to measure the daily growth of a bean plant. Which should the students do every day of this investigation?
Ice cream in a bowl changed from solid to liquid in a few minutes. Which of the following most likely caused this change?
The change in the use of one model of the solar system to the use of another model resulted in major changes in science and society. Which two scientists produced the earlier and later models, respectively?
An atom with a +1 charge has
Which is an example of a single-celled organism?
The Great Ocean Conveyer ocean current system runs north through the Atlantic from the equatorial region. If this current got disrupted, North American and European climates would become
Which region of the Milky Way contains a population that consists mostly of old stars?
When a switch to a ceiling fan is turned on, electrical energy is being transformed into
An agricultural scientist, George Washington Carver, is most famous for his research on
A student pours a clear liquid from a test tube into a beaker with a clear liquid already in it and notices that the mixture turns pink. The student infers the two clear liquids are different. This inference is a result of
In what leaf structure is photosynthetic tissue found?
The crude oil extracted today was formed millions of years ago from the fossilized remains of algae and other tiny marine organisms. Most parts of the organisms decomposed soon after they died. Which biomolecules decomposed more slowly and became the basis of crude oil?
Temperatures below freezing are expected overnight. What might be done to protect plants growing outside?
Prolonged exercise stimulates muscle cells to absorb sugar from the blood. This mechanism reduces stress placed on the body by signaling the body to produce
Which geologic feature is evidence that the North American plate once collided with the Eurasian and African plates?
During an experiment, a student reports that a liquid turned green when mixed with another liquid. This is an example of
Which of the following causes a chemical change?
Which human organ system exchanges gases with the environment?
Improvements in geological observation technologies have made it easier for scientists to locate resources in Earth's crust. These technologies have allowed for an increase in availability of which resource?
An engineer constructs a prototype from wood. Which of the following is the best tool for the engineer to use to make the prototype's surface smooth?
If left in the sunshine, water in an open jar will
In some locations, squirrels sleep for long periods of time during the winter months. Which of the following most likely causes these squirrels to sleep for long periods of time?
Which of the following helps the body to cool down?
The brown fur of the arctic hare turns white in winter. How does this color change most likely help the arctic hare?
A group of students found metamorphic rocks near a campsite. The presence of metamorphic rocks is most likely evidence of
As water vapor condenses into liquid, which of the following can be formed?
Which of these particles, when found in soil, contributes most to the water retention in soil?
Which of the following forms of energy is released or absorbed in most chemical reactions?
Which of these must occur for sediments to form new rock?
A student wants to find the most accurate account of a scientific discovery that took place within the past three months. In which of these sources should the student look?
What is taken in by the leaves of a tree so it can make its own food?
Radio signal interruption sometimes causes a humming or buzzing sound. These sounds are most likely caused by
Students planned an investigation that included adding a quantity of vinegar to a small amount of baking soda. Which is the best tool to measure the volume of the liquid vinegar used in the investigation?
Garrett collected some large rocks from a stream near his home. He measured the rocks on a balance. When he records the mass of the rocks, which units should Garrett use?
Which of the statements is the most accurate in describing the chemical equation shown below? 2H_{2}(g) + O_{2}(g) -> 2H_{2}O(g) + energy
A female dog is having puppies. She has black fur, brown eyes, and a curly tail. She can sit, bark, and roll over on command. Which set of traits can the female dog's puppies inherit?
Scientists estimate that Maryland contains more than 850 million tons of coal. Coal is most commonly used to produce ___.
Large populations of tortoises inhabited the Galapagos Islands before humans. When humans settled on the islands and introduced goats, the number of tortoise declined. What is most likely the explanation for the decrease in the tortoise population?
Hereditary information is transmitted from parents to offspring through
Which device converts kinetic energy into electrical energy?
Which behavior is a learned behavior?
The distance between the Sun and the next closest star, Proxima Centauri, is most accurately measured in
Which of these uses sound waves to locate underwater objects?
Paleontologists are scientists who study evidence of past life on Earth. Which method do paleontologists most likely use to determine the forms of life that existed millions of years ago?
The temperature in a hot star is high enough to pull electrons away from atoms. What state of matter results from this process?
Which resource, abundant in Nevada, is nonrenewable?
A student reaches one hand into a bag filled with smooth objects. The student feels the objects but does not look into the bag. Which property of the objects can the student most likely identify?
An abiotic factor that most influences the organisms living in a salt marsh is
When oil is burning, the reaction will
Fourth graders are planning a roller-skate race. Which surface would be the best for this race?
Protein is used by the human body to
Changes in the weather are important to people living in Alaska. Which two tools best help scientists to share information about weather?
Which outcome is most likely if a person consumes more Calories than needed for daily activities?
In a mixture, a magnet is used to separate some particles from sand. The dark particles are most likely made of which element?
A student tosses a ball into the air. Which force causes the ball to fall back to the ground?
The gravitational force between two objects depends on the distance between the objects and each object's
Scientists who have studied global climate changes have found that the average temperature of Earth has risen. There has also been an increase in the accumulation of atmospheric greenhouse gases. What is the goal of the scientific community in collecting this type of data?
Paper chromatography is a process used to separate mixtures of substances into their components. The components are carried by a mobile phase through a stationary phase made of absorbent paper. An investigation analyzed a sample of black ink to determine its components.Which property allows the components to separate?
In one area, a large source of prey for eagles is rabbits. If the number of rabbits suddenly decreases, what effect will it most likely have on the eagles?
Moving water in a river is considered a renewable resource because it
When studying planetary data, Jackie found some similarities and differences among the planets that make up the solar system. Which generalization is true about the orbits of the major planets in the solar system?
When nitrogen-rich runoff from farms enters a nearby farm, it causes abundant growth of algal mat on the pond surface. As a result, underwater plants in the pond begin to die. Identify the limiting factor that is most responsible for causing the underwater plants to die.
What is the main source of energy for the water cycle?
Which of the following properties of a substance is conserved during thermal expansion?
Trees use narrow tubes to transport water upward. Which property of water allows the water to rise in these narrow tubes?
Which pair together could cause a rainbow?
The property of matter that resists changes in motion is called
Monarch butterflies use milkweed plants during all of their life stages. Milkweed plants grow in open areas, such as grasslands and wetlands. They also often grow between row crops. Given this information, which of these biotechnologies would pose the greatest threat to monarch butterflies?
In the past, Native American Indians buried dead fish along with corn seeds. This technique was used because the decomposing dead fish would
Earth is composed of layers of material with different properties. Which of the following is most likely to be in constant motion?
Which mechanism helps carbon to cycle from the atmosphere to living organisms?
A city has an outbreak of a disease that affects an unusually large portion of its population at the same time. Which term best describes the outbreak?
In which structure is the Sun located?
Removing waste from the body is the primary function of which body system?
Which discovery revealed that the universe contains many structures composed of millions of stars?
If a tall tree falls over in a crowded forest, which resource becomes available to the surrounding plants?
What best describes the mantle of Earth?
When Javier exercises, his muscle cells need more oxygen. Which would help Javier's muscle cells receive more oxygen?
Which process has most likely occurred when new traits appear in a species?
A patient visits the doctor for a checkup and is diagnosed with skin cancer. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this disease?
Which of the following forms of energy can travel by vibrating particles of air?
A chef uses a metal spoon to stir noodles cooking in a pan. After five minutes, she notices that the thermal energy from the pan has made the spoon
Which will most likely cause a decrease in predator populations?
A robin catches and eats a cricket. Which statement best describes the roles of each animal?
Hookworms live inside the intestines of dogs. As the dog eats, the hookworms consume partially digested food. As a result of this nutrient diversion, the dog can become malnourished and weakened. Which best describes the relationship between the hookworms and the dog?
The prairie grass ecosystem once had a deep layer of topsoil which was protected by the grasses that covered it. Removal of these grasses for farmland is causing the soil to be eroded mainly by
When the Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun, what season is occurring in Australia?
Light waves are arranged in the electromagnetic spectrum by
In order to distinguish fact from opinion, conclusions in experiments should be
Pumice is formed when lava from a volcano cools. Which rock type is pumice?
The principle of uniformitarianism states that most of the landscape of Earth was formed slowly and over a long period of time. Which occurrence of Earth is least supported by this principle?
Selective breeding has resulted in plants that are resistant to pests and produce a higher yield of fruits and vegetables. Which of these is the most likely disadvantage that can result from this process?
A student measured the volume of water in a pan. The student boiled the water for thirty minutes and then measured the volume of the water again. The volume of water most likely
Lori owns a house next to the lake. She uses lots of fertilizer to keep her lawn green. Which impact could fertilizing her lawn have on the lake?
To compare the hardness of different minerals, it would be BEST to find
A house is built in a desert, where there is no electricity and very little wind. Which action could lead to operating the electrical appliances in the house that would cause the least amount of environmental pollution?
Students are learning about the natural resources in Maryland. One group of students researches information about renewable natural resources in the state. The other group researches information about nonrenewable natural resources in the state. The resources the students investigate include plants, animals, soil, minerals, water, coal, and oil. Which nonrenewable natural resource heats homes?
Gregor Mendel was the first to show that organisms had traits that are passed on from parents to the next generation. In order for the scientific community to accept Mendel's discovery, others had to
Alicia has lots of old bicycle parts. She wants to build something new with the parts. What is the first thing Alicia should do?
Which is a major organ of the nervous system?
Some students were investigating the relationship between position, time, and speed. The students marked the initial position of a toy car. The students set the car into motion and marked the position of the car each second. Which of these are most appropriate for recording and analyzing the students' data?
If the number of trees significantly decreases, the atmosphere's level of which gas might significantly increase?
Which of the following is the best estimate of the number of stars in a typical galaxy?
A company plants trees on a bare hillside. Which of these is the BEST reason for planting the trees?
Index fossils help scientists estimate the age of a rock because index fossil species only existed for a relatively short time. What happened to the species that are now used as index fossils?
Feathers, wings, and the hollow bones of birds are examples of
A student climbs up a rocky mountain trail in Maine. She sees many small pieces of rock on the path. Which action most likely made the small pieces of rock?
Which of the following heat exchange processes involves the collision of particles?
The most effective way to show a change happening over time is to display your results using a
The diet of a brown bear includes roots, grasses, berries, nuts, fish, insects, and mammals. Based on this description, in what category is a brown bear?
A bracket fungus grows on a dead tree and breaks it down into chemical nutrients. What term best classifies the role of a bracket fungus in this ecosystem?
The comet Shoemaker-Levy struck the planet Jupiter in July of 1994. The process of a comet striking a planet is an example of a net decrease in kinetic energy. Kinetic energy was ultimately converted into
An earthquake in the Earth's crust under the ocean releases sound waves. Which statement accurately describes how the sound waves spread?
Which provides the oldest evidence for oxygen accumulation in Earth's atmosphere?
Louis Pasteur discovered that the bacteria in a substance can be killed by heating the substance for a short period of time. Which of these practices benefited most from Pasteur's discovery?
How do traits of animals such as ear shape, nose shape, and hair color most often get passed to offspring?
Why is the ozone content of the stratosphere important to living organisms?
If an environment becomes warmer and drier, the change that would most likely help a species adapt would be an increase in its
Thousands of years ago, several species of large mammals existed in North America. These species became extinct not long after the first human settlement of North America. Which human activity most likely contributed to the extinction of these mammals?
Which of the following is an example of a behavioral adaptation?
Which two processes could result in the formation of high mountains with well-rounded peaks?
The brown tree snake is a nonnative species found on the South Pacific island of Guam. The brown tree snake population in Guam is so large that it negatively affects the humans there. Which statement best explains why the brown tree snake has flourished in Guam?
How are droughts always different from floods?
Which of the following is a harmful waste material that leaves the blood and travels through the lungs before leaving the body?
How are a tree and grass alike?
What organ system in the human body contains the pituitary gland, hypothalamus gland, and thyroid gland?
Which term describes an organism's ability to maintain a stable internal environment?
Which of the following can provide the human body with long-term immunity against some diseases?
Which event is most likely to increase the genetic variation in a population of organisms?
Where would animals and plants be most affected by a flood?
Which seismic wave phenomenon, found at structural boundaries, allows scientists to interpret the interior structure of Earth?
When ice melts, it becomes a
Which combination of letters could be used as a chemical symbol for an element?
How is the stratosphere different from the troposphere?
If a student gets a chemical splashed into an eye, what is the most appropriate first action to be taken?
Which of the following best describes an advantage of using a mass production manufacturing system instead of a custom manufacturing system?
Which adaptation allows a walrus to stay warm in cold water?
Ninety-nine percent of the mass of an atom is located in
Which of the following is a common renewable resource found in deserts?
Beaver dams can cause floods. This statement shows how
A scientist crosses a red-flowered plant with a white-flowered plant, and all offspring have red flowers. What will most likely result if these red-flowered offspring are crossed with white-flowered plants?
Genetically modified plants with new characteristics have been produced through genetic engineering methods. What impacts have resulted from the use of genetically modified plants?
Which best explains the importance of nitrogen in the cycling of energy and matter?
Which of these mixtures would be easiest to separate?
If you wanted to be able to look at the stars, the planets, and the Moon more closely, what should you use?
Which of the following is a correct food chain?
Which of these is directly formed as a result of weathering and erosion?
Most underground caves are formed by the action of water on
A group of students is taking a hike along a stream channel. One student picks up a rock from the stream and notices that the rock is very smooth and round. Which type of weathering most likely shaped the rock?
Which of the following is most likely to make a rock crack and crumble?
Which is the most likely reason why scientific theories change?
A plant produces tiny plants around the edges of its leaves. When these tiny plants fall to the ground, they take root and become new plants. This process is an example of
A function of a plant's roots is to
In order for sediments to become rock, the sediments are generally
When bedrock in Massachusetts is examined, it often appears scraped and polished. Which of the following most likely caused the bedrock to appear scraped and polished?
Endothermic reactions are reactions that require more energy to start than they give off in the products. Which statement describes an endothermic reaction?
Which pair of English and metric units has most nearly the same value?
Students are studying the classifications of stars and they learned that the majority of stars are similar to the Sun. What can the students conclude knowing that most of the stars in the galaxy are like the Sun?
Mosquitoes have adapted to detect carbon dioxide using certain sensory nerves. Mosquitoes instinctually move toward greater concentrations of carbon dioxide. What is the importance of this adaptation?
Which unit can be used to describe an object's length?
Meteorologists categorize hurricanes based on the Saffir-Simpson scale. The scale measures the intensity and destructive potential of hurricanes. Which factor has the most significant effect on the strength of a hurricane?
Multicellular organisms grow in size by producing more
Which a molecular process found only in retroviruses?
A group of students are observing a fish tank for a school assignment. The group is to share the observations with the class. Which statement about observations is true?
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_{3}) is commonly known as baking soda. Sodium bicarbonate is a white solid that can dissolve in water. Under the proper conditions, sodium bicarbonate can release carbon dioxide (CO_{2}) gas. Which of the following is not a physical property of sodium bicarbonate?
To help it survive, an organism has a capsule, endospore, and pili. To which group does this organism belong?
What advantage is gained by using radio telescopes as opposed to optical telescopes?
The process by which organisms with favorable variations reproduce at higher rates than those without such variations is
Competition is most likely to occur between which two organisms?
Some animals, such as squirrels, may bury acorns. Which of the following is most likely to happen to the acorns after they have been buried?
Why are most fossils found in sedimentary rocks?
Which model is used by scientists to determine the properties of elements?
Life is more likely to be found on a planet whose atmosphere contains abundant
Approximately how long does Earth take to complete its orbit around the Sun?
A student describes a substance as lacking a definite shape. The description also states that the particles of matter are close to each other but still able to flow past each other. Which type of substance is the student most likely describing?
Electron transport in mitochondria results in a chemiosmotic gradient of which particle across the mitochondrial membrane?
At science conventions, scientists present their research, and members of the audience can discuss or ask questions about the research. The main value of these science conventions is that they allow scientists to
When a boy stands in a field in the sunlight, he usually is able to see his
In the human body, which system functions primarily to defend the body against disease?
The moon goes through phases as it revolves around Earth. During which phase of the moon would it be possible for a solar eclipse to occur?
Which of these is the most common result of greenhouse gases altering the atmosphere of Earth?
A student was taking notes while the teacher was discussing cells. Which of these is a statement that the teacher most likely made?
What goal does taxonomy accomplish?
The fusion reaction that fuels the Sun converts hydrogen into
The main function of hormones in the human body is to
Which gas, when condensed into its liquid state in the atmosphere, forms clouds?
Fertilizers added by farmers to the soil contain high amounts of nitrates. How do fertilizers affect the nitrogen cycle?
A scientist is comparing two body cells of a multicellular organism. Which of the following is most likely identical?
Organisms that consume wastes to obtain the nutrients they need to survive are classified as
In the 1600s, Galileo Galilei studied the moons of Jupiter. What did Galileo do to make better observations?
Which of these provides the best evidence that Earth's crust is divided into tectonic plates?
What causes the soil in a flood plain to be generally rich in nutrients?
Which characteristic is common to all reptile species?
Scientists working for a company are testing a new medicine that they think will help heal damaged tissue. In which part of the company are the scientists working?
Most of Earth's surface is covered by
The chemical equation below shows reactants and products. 6CO_{2} + 12H_{2}O + light + enzymes -> C_{6}H_{12}O_{6} + 6O_{2} + 6H_{2}O Which statement is best supported by analyzing this equation?
In a desert environment, cactus wrens often build their nests in cholla cacti to avoid predators. This behavior does not hurt the cacti. Which type of relationship do cactus wrens and cholla cacti demonstrate?
The Davis Mountains in West Texas used to be taller than they are now. Which of the following conditions most likely caused the mountains to become shorter over time?
Photosynthesis is the process that converts carbon dioxide and water into
Which statement best describes the organization of the Periodic Table of the Elements?
Signs in many stores and restaurants warn that microwaves are in use. What is the main reason for this warning?
A scientist studies the remains of two extinct animals to learn more about how they lived. She determines that one animal was a carnivore and the other was an herbivore. Which of the following did the scientist most likely compare to make this conclusion?
Human actions can change the rate at which soil erodes. Which of the following would most likely slow the rate of soil erosion?
Which ability is the most useful for making observations?
Sterling silver is a combination of silver and copper. Which of the following is also a combination of two or more metals?
The cows in a rancher's herd of cattle have been selectively bred to produce milk. Which of the following will cause the next generation of cows to receive the trait for producing large quantities of milk?
What is the correct explanation for why we have day and night on Earth?
The body maintains equilibrium through a series of messages called a feedback mechanism. What organ releases hormones that maintain balanced glucose levels?
Environmental organizations have asked businesses to take action to reduce waste. Which of the following changes could a business make in order to become more “environmentally friendly”?
The sound heard when a piano key is hit is caused by
Wolves kill many elk every year and often attack old, sick, and injured members of a herd. Which of the following best describes the role of the wolves in the wolf-elk relationship?
Which of the following is produced when sugar is digested in an animal cell?
Which of these groups contains single-celled organisms?
Students studying rocks notice that in a particular location there are many igneous rocks that are very similar. This observation best supports which statement?
Shale is a sedimentary rock that can be metamorphosed into slate by
Plants need iron to grow. What parts of plants take in iron?
Which of the following is the best observation of the refraction of light?
A group of students investigated the effect of water temperature on the gill movements of goldfish. The students tested water temperatures from 20°C to 10°C at 2-degree intervals. The data showed that as water temperature decreased, the average number of gill movements per minute by the goldfish also decreased. Which type of display is BEST used to show this relationship?
The directions for making a protein
Denise was driving east over a hill in the afternoon, shortly after a rain shower. Suddenly the sun broke through the clouds, and she saw a rainbow ahead of her. Which of the following made the rainbow possible?
Rhea is a moon of Saturn. Which of these facts about Rhea best indicates that it does not have a water cycle in which water changes state?
Which two factors determine the gravitational attraction between two objects?
When a red bull (RR) is bred with a white cow (WW), a roan calf (RW) is sometimes produced. If a roan bull (RW) is bred with a roan cow (RW), what is the most likely outcome of the offspring?
Which adaptive feature most helps a baby jaguar survive the first few weeks of life?
Frank needs to move a box by sliding it across the floor. Which two factors will most strongly affect how hard Frank needs to push the box?
An ocean, a forest, and a grassy meadow are each examples of a complete ecosystem. Complete ecosystems contain only
The Great Basin in Nevada is characterized by uplifted, tilted blocks forming mountain ranges and downthrown blocks forming basins. What rock type is MOST likely to form in the basins?
As the human population increases, more fossil fuels are being used. The burning of fossil fuels produces greenhouse gases. How might humans reduce greenhouse gases?
Which situation would most likely cause an object to travel in a circular motion?
Which of the following does not give an example of how sparrows use resources in their environment to survive?
Henry and Emily are building a tree house. Which tool should be used to measure the height of the door?
Windy, cloudy, rainy, and cold are words that help describe
All these statements concerning galaxies are accurate except
Hydrogen gas and oxygen gas combine to form water. Which would be a more concise way of expressing what happens in this chemical reaction?
What safety equipment should be taken on all field trips?
The surface gravity of Pluto is the weakest of the nine planets because Pluto
If a class wants to measure the speed of a bicycle during an outdoor lab exercise, which two devices would be most useful?
When sunlight shines on a plant, its leaves
Toads lay their eggs in ponds. Tadpoles hatch from the eggs and eat the plants floating in the pond. Which resource is most important for toads to survive?
Which structure surrounds and protects an animal cell?
A ball is thrown straight up. Which statement best describes the motion of the ball while the ball is at the maximum height?
Which organ is most responsible for oxygen entering the blood stream?
Why is a healthy diet important?
In the human body, the breaking down of food into simple substances occurs in the
Which of the following processes is an important part of star formation?
Carlos puts a new battery into a radio. What does the battery supply to the radio that makes it turn on?
What may form as a direct result of a star collapsing?
A shoe manufacturer randomly selects 10% of the production from each shift. Each of these shoes is checked to ensure that it is correctly made. What is this process called?
Some materials are electrical conductors. Which material best conducts electricity?
Angela wants to report daily weather conditions. In which unit should Angela record the air temperature?
Which organisms use the energy from the remains of dead animals and recycle the nutrients back into the environment?
Which is the first step in a design process?
What type of chemical reaction occurs when the body breaks down fats and sugars that supply it with energy?
Intense heat and pressure in Earth's crust can change sandstone into quartzite. During this metamorphosis, many properties of these rocks change. Which property of these rocks will most likely remain the same?
How do decomposers obtain their food?
A ball on a cart is moving at a rate of 2 m/s. The cart suddenly stops and the ball continues to travel in the same direction at the same speed. This is an example of the
Why is it important to have a large sample size in an investigation?
Burt used a spoon to stir soup that was cooking on his stove. Which spoon will stay the coolest while he stirs?
Which is a distinction between an epidemic and a pandemic?
When two bumper cars collide, some of the kinetic energy of the cars is transformed. Which form of energy is most likely formed as a result of this collision?
Which statement describes all matter?
Carbon dioxide is removed from Earth's atmosphere by
A water company uses lab tests on the water supply before sending the water through pipes to people's homes. How do these lab tests help people?
What safety rule is most important for students to follow when working with acids and bases?
A person in a dark room looking through a window can clearly see a person outside in the daylight. But a person outside cannot see the person inside. Why does this happen?
Many processes on Earth occur at or near tectonic plate boundaries. Which geological events are most common along tectonic plate boundaries?
Two pool (billiard) balls collide, causing each to move in a different direction. Eventually, both come to a stop. The most important factor in causing them to stop is
Which of these provides the best evidence that the environment of Earth has changed over millions of years?
Which physical characteristic do some organisms have that helps them survive in the Arctic?
Which of the following occurs during photosynthesis?
A common characteristic of all living things is that they
In the solar system, moons orbit planets. Which of these do planets orbit?
Visible light is which type of wave?
In some national parks, controlled fires are maintained by firefighters. Which of these is one of the major reasons for using controlled burns to maintain certain ecosystems?
Which of the following actions is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral sample?
In Costa Rica a small tree, the acacia, provides shelter and food for ants. The ants protect the acacia by removing other insects and vines that might harm it. Which term best describes the relationship between the acacia and the ants?
A car skids along the road and smoke appears to be coming from under the tires. The heat that produces the smoke is caused by
A glacier sometimes leaves behind large chunks of ice. What is left in the ground when these chunks of ice melt?
A student uses a high-efficiency gasoline lawnmower to cut grass. The term "high efficiency" is used to indicate that the lawnmower
Which example would result in new cells that are most different from the parent cells?
A dog gets the energy it needs to run from ___.
Certain flowers will open for twelve hours and then close. Which stimulus do the flowers respond to when they open and then when they close for that time period?
Smoking harms the body in many ways. It is most harmful to which organ?
In 1609, Galileo Galilei used lenses to construct the first telescope. His telescope allowed him to observe many objects in space. His invention of the telescope and the data he gathered directly contributed to the understanding that
The energy obtained from food is measured in units called
Which part of the body works closely with the digestive system to transport nutrients to the cells?
An example of a learned behavior is
Iron oxides, such as rust, form when iron metal reacts with oxygen in the air. What are the chemical symbols for the two elements found in iron oxide?
When water evaporates from Earth's surface into the atmosphere, its molecules enter the gas state. What change in this gas causes molecules to condense into the small water droplets that form clouds?
Which process directly adds carbon into the atmosphere?
Scientists think that dolphins and whales may have evolved from a common ancestor. What evidence supports this hypothesis?
A particular organism is able to survive in an environment due to a thick layer of fat beneath its skin. In which situation would the layer of fat most likely be a survival advantage?
Which technology was developed most recently?
A student hypothesizes that algae are producers. Which question will best help the student determine if this is correct?
Soccer players use their muscle systems to kick a ball into a goal. What organ system coordinates the muscles?
Planets in the solar system are in constant motion. What factor has the greatest effect on the orbits of the planets?
How is a pond different from a lake?
A substance with a mass of 10 g is heated to produce two new substances. The mass of the first new substance is 9.3 g and the mass of the second new substance is 0.7 g. Which of the following is best demonstrated by this example?
The cilia in the respiratory system are responsible for preventing dirt and mucus from entering the bronchial tubes and lungs. If the cilia are damaged, the person's bronchial tubes and lungs are most likely to
Which two traits would best distinguish a bird from other vertebrates?
A green plant absorbs light. A frog eats flies. These are both examples of how organisms
Which of these scientific advances occurred first?
Which instrument measures atmospheric pressure?
Which of the following is produced during the process of cellular respiration?
An anemometer is a tool that measures
The element cesium, Cs, is an alkali metal. Which chemical formula represents a cesium compound that is likely to exist?
The cells of a plant help the plant maintain its life functions. What part of a plant cell has the function of producing sugar in the presence of sunlight?
A sample of sulfur forms crystals when it
When a person is infected with the influenza virus, the immune system defends the body through a cell-mediated immune response. Which immune cell is responsible for protecting the body from the influenza virus infection?
Which form of solar radiation causes sunburn?
About 75% of the world's active volcanoes are the result of tectonic activity around which plate?
Which of the following is the most accurate measurement for the length of an object that is actually 15.0 m long?
After a rainfall, which process in the water cycle draws the water back up into the air?
When a person speaks, the type of wave produced can be described as all these except
Bill stands in a swimming pool and notices that the water around his feet is a lot cooler than the water near the surface. Which process causes this difference in temperature?
Andy adds a small amount of water to sand and makes shapes with the wet sand. Which of these best describes the wet sand?
To observe materials up close and in greater detail we use
Joyce is conducting a traffic survey and needs to find out how many cars cross the crosswalk in the morning before the school bell rings. How should she collect this data?
A student conducts an experiment to determine the average size of acorn that squirrels eat. The student gave several different sizes of acorns to a squirrel. Which action would most likely improve the results?
India is in the Northern Hemisphere and Australia is in the Southern Hemisphere. In June, it is summer in India and winter in Australia. What is the main reason the seasons are opposite in the two countries?
What contributes the most to beach erosion?
Which type of graph would best display the changes in temperature over a 24 hour period?
Which structure determines the traits that will be passed to offspring?
Oak trees produce seeds that are contained in acorns. Blue jays eat the seeds in acorns. Blue jays also collect acorns and hide them in the ground, often far away from the parent oak tree. Blue jays do not eat the seed of every acorn they hide. How do oak trees benefit from blue jays' collecting and hiding acorns?
Which step of the scientific method will follow after a student graphs collected data during a lab experiment?
Which is a true statement about cells?
Which kind of events can form mountains?
During the early 1990s, people began using cell phones to communicate. The development of the cell phone was most likely a response to the need of society to
Which process uses carbon from the air to make food for plants?
Organisms contain DNA. What makes prokaryotic DNA different from eukaryotic DNA?
The changing appearances of the nighttime sky over the surface of Earth and eclipses of the Moon have provided evidence that
Scientists found evidence of past glacial activity in Massachusetts. Which of the following conclusions is best supported by this evidence?
Which statement explains why a mother's unhealthy diet during pregnancy is harmful to her embryo's development?
Which word best describes the physical state of an ice cube?
All nations need to import and export goods for their economic survival. As a result, many island nations have developed advanced technology for transporting goods by
A species of mouse spends the day sleeping in its burrow to avoid high daytime temperatures. It is processing what little water it needs from the seeds it collects. To which environment is this mouse best adapted?
What system helps the body defend itself against disease while maintaining the levels of body fluids?
After fossils are formed, which process is most likely to destroy them?
Which of these causes the MOST evaporation of water from a lake?
Jeannie put her soccer ball on the ground on the side of a hill. What force acted on the soccer ball to make it roll down the hill?
Which tools are needed to measure the length and mass of a seashell?
Which statement about the genetic traits of humans is true?
Geotropism is a response by plants to which force?
In a lake near a farm the growth of algae suddenly increased. This increase was most likely due to which of the following?
Jenna gave a report to her class about the Orion Nebula. She told the class that it was discovered in 1610. Which was most likely the topic of her paper?
Which statement best describes the semiconservative replication sequence of the DNA sequence CCGCAT?
If the environment in an area is destroyed, a new community of organisms sometimes takes the place of previous communities. The introduction of a new community of organisms is known as
The formula X + ZY -> XZ + Y shows that
Alisha's teacher glued a needle to a piece of cork so that the needle would float. Then he used a magnet to magnetize the needle. When the needle was placed in a bowl of water, it turned to point north. Which best describes the reason that the needle pointed north?
A population of plants growing on an island consisted of two varieties, one with thorns and the other without. Over a period of many years, the variety with thorns gradually disappeared. Which process most likely brought about this change in the plant population?
While hiking last year, Mike saw a large boulder next to a mountain trail. The boulder had no cracks. While hiking on the trail this year, he saw two large cracks in the boulder. Which of the following most likely caused these cracks to form?
Many animals blend in with their environment and can not be easily seen by predators. This is an example of which adaptation?
Two parent butterflies with normal wings have offspring with altered wing shapes. What most likely caused this change?
Which is most responsible for reflecting incoming solar heat back to space?
Which of these is a characteristic of the metal gold?
Which model can be used to trace genetic inheritance?
Which statement best describes an atom with an atomic number of 20?
Scientists have developed an allergy medication from a plant that is part of the rainforest food chain. What concern might develop when producing this medication from the plant?
Granite is a hard material and forms from cooling magma. Granite is a type of
Seismic waves occur as a result of an earthquake. Which statement describes a wave property that makes it possible for scientists to locate the source of an earthquake?
Which is most important to do when making directions for an experiment?
A scientist is trying to decide whether an organism is unicellular or multicellular. Which information would help the scientist most to make her decision?
During digestion, strong acids are added to food to help break down the food chemically. Into which organ are most of these acids added?
Earth, along with the other planets, revolves around the Sun. The planets revolve in a counterclockwise direction. The cause of the revolution is mostly due to which force?
When placed in a glucose solution, yeast cells will produce bubbles. Which process are the yeast cells carrying out?
In order to make a line graph showing the rate of erosion on the banks of a river during a week-long flood, the y-axis should be labeled as the width of the river bank, in meters. The best label for the x-axis is time, in
A student is investigating the effect of different nutrients on the growth of seedling plants. Which of these would be an independent (manipulated) variable in the investigation?
One type of animal hatches from an egg, breathes through gills when it is young, and mainly lives on land as an adult. Into which group is this animal classified?
A science teacher is discussing the immune system with his class. Which statement should the teacher make about this system?
Which of the following has been formed on the Asian continent by two continental plates that have been pressing together for millions of years?
Before large trees could grow on Earth, what had to happen first?
Which is most likely a direct cause of an ear infection?
Scientists believe that oceans once covered much of what is now land. which of these things found on land led scientists to believe this?
Which of the following is an example of a structural adaptation?
Which is made by plants to attract pollinators to flowers?
When light reaches an eyeglass lens, the light is
For half an hour, a student watches two different types of flowering bushes and counts the number of butterflies that come to feed on each bush. What would be the best way to show the data?
Where are electrons in an atom located?
Which energy resource is considered non-renewable?
Which characteristic is exclusive to chordates?
Land forms are created through destructive forces such as weathering. Which of these is an example of physical weathering?
A student placed an ice cube on a plate in the sun. Ten minutes later, only water was on the plate. Which process caused the ice cube to change to water?
In Colonial America, people used ice to help keep foods fresh. They cut the ice from lakes and ponds during the winter and stored the ice in ice houses. They sometimes used hay as an insulator to prevent the ice from melting. If you wanted to build an icehouse today, which of the following would be the best material to use as an insulator?
Tides, such as those along the coast of Massachusetts, are caused by gravitational attractions acting on Earth. Why is the gravitational attraction of the Moon a greater factor in determining tides than the gravitational attraction of the much larger Sun?
A group of students compared the effects of fertilizer on the growth of tomato plants. The students gave six tomato plants Fertilizer 1 and six other tomato plants Fertilizer 2. They grew the plants under the same conditions. After several weeks, the students concluded that the tomato plants that received Fertilizer 1 grew taller than those that received Fertilizer 2. Which of the following actions would have increased the accuracy of the results of this investigation?
In order to form water, two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom must be
What makes up most of a human skeleton?
As water cools to a temperature of zero degrees Celsius and forms ice, water molecules tend to
An object composed mainly of ice is orbiting the Sun in an elliptical path. This object is most likely
Which process occurs during meiosis that contributes to a germ cell having unique genetic material?
Wave energy from the ocean can be harnessed to power generators to make electricity. Energy from ocean tides can also be used to make electricity. How would you categorize these two sources of energy?
Algae are organisms that live in water. Scientists discovered a new type of red algae near Knight Island in Prince William Sound. Which statement is most likely a positive effect of this discovery?
What layer of Earth is located just below the crust?
Which of these daily activities can most directly help reduce air pollution in a city?
Seafloor spreading occurs along certain boundaries in the ocean. Which are most likely to form at the boundary where the seafloor is spreading?
Which method is the best safety procedure when working around open flames?
Why has only one-half of the Moon ever been observed from Earth?
What keeps the Moon orbiting Earth?
When the roller coaster rolls onto a flat section of track, what force would ultimately bring it to a stop if no other forces are added?
Which activity would most likely increase water turbidity in a nearby stream?
Which environmental factor will cause a plant shoot to grow in a direction other than straight up?
What property is the same for each atom of an element?
In a city near the ocean, fog often forms on summer mornings. Which of the following statements best explains how this fog forms?
Which land feature is formed from erosion by waves?
Mr. Thompson's class was discussing the topic of convergent boundaries. He asked four students to identify a landform that was formed through the collision of two tectonic plates. Which landform should the students identify as being formed by convergent boundaries?
When finished with a laboratory investigation the last thing a student should do is to
Nerve impulses are transmitted along structures of a neuron as an action potential. Which part of a neuron receives the stimulation of these impulses?
The atmosphere of Earth changed when plant life increased. Before there were plants, the atmosphere contained much less
The force of gravitational attraction between two objects depends on the distance between the objects and their
A student stands outside on a cold winter day. His hands become cold and he rubs them together to make them warmer. Which statement explains why rubbing his hands together makes them warmer?
Which type of air mass forms over the ocean near the equator?
A scientist observes changes in a bee population every day for thirty days. The scientist arranges the data in a pictogram. Which form of data display is most similar to the organization of a pictogram?
A student conducts an experiment with potato slices and salt water. The student wants to determine if a higher concentration of salt will affect the amount of water a potato slice absorbs. Which tool would be best to compare the masses of the potato slices?
Weather patterns sometimes result in drought. Which activity would be most negatively affected during a drought year?
Hurricane season for the Atlantic Ocean lasts from June to November. Which factor makes an Atlantic hurricane less likely to form during the month of March?
Scientists study the reaction of some bacteria to antibiotics, hoping to learn about a new strain of resistant bacteria. This method of gaining scientific knowledge is best described as
If an atom has five protons and four electrons, the atom is
There are some towns located in the valley of the Alpine mountains. During part of the year, these towns stay dark all day because the mountains block the Sun. During which season would the Sun be low enough in the sky that the village stays in the shadows?
Which of the following is the most likely cause of earthquakes?
Which best explains the cause of the geysers formed in Yellowstone National Park?
There are different types of desert. What do they all have in common?
Students are studying liquids that make bubbles. Which question could be answered by using a ruler?
Plants use energy directly from the sun. What do they use the energy from the sun for?
Which technique has helped scientists more accurately determine the age of fossils and draw conclusions about changes in organisms over time?
Which trait do cows and grass have in common?
Which is considered a renewable resource?
A lamp converts electrical energy to light energy. In addition to the light energy, much of this electrical energy is also converted to
When some subatomic particles split from each other, energy is released. What kind of energy is this?
For centuries, farmers have been taking cuttings of productive plants and rooting the cuttings to make new plants. Which kind of modern technology uses genetic information most similarly to the cutting and rooting process?
Bruce plays his violin every Friday night for the symphony. Before he plays, he plucks each string to see if his violin is in tune. Which is most responsible for the generation of sound waves from his violin?
What cycle is most directly affected by the combustion of fossil fuels?
After Audrey drinks a glass of juice, digestive processes deliver glucose to the bloodstream. From the bloodstream, glucose molecules enter the cell. In order for glucose molecules to be used by the cell, glucose-specific enzymes must do what?
What type of landform is most likely formed by a divergent tectonic plate boundary?
When electricity is used to run appliances in a building, the electricity is measured in kilowatt-hours. Which of these units could be used in place of "kilowatt-hour"?
Camels have humps on their backs that store fat, allowing them to survive for many days without food. This makes camels well suited to desert life. This characteristic is an example of
Which two protein molecules are essential for muscle contraction and relaxation?
The atmosphere of Earth blocks many of the Sun's rays. If weather patterns change and more of the Sun's rays penetrate the atmosphere of Earth, which is most likely to increase?
An automobile engine transforms chemical energy of fuel primarily into
Which body system sends electrical signals to all other body systems?
In what way do bushes benefit from bears eating their berries?
In the water cycle, after water has condensed to form clouds, it falls back to Earth in the form of
Which process will directly result in organic matter being added to the soil?
Neutrons are particles of an atom that
Divergent tectonic plate boundaries most commonly form
Which process accounts for the expansion and contraction of rocks?
A major function of a plant's roots is to
Which layer of Earth makes up the smallest percentage of the planet's mass?
Earth's mantle, primarily composed of silicate and magnesium oxide rocks, floats on top of the liquid iron and nickel outer core. Which difference between these two layers of Earth resulted in their differentiation?
Edith's checkerspot butterfly is a non-migratory species found in distinct populations from Canada to Mexico. Today, populations in southern regions are declining while new populations push the northern limit further north. This range shift provides evidence for the theory of
Some people carry a mutated allele of a particular gene that makes them resistant to HIV infection and AIDS. Which best describes this type of mutation?
Sodium is a metal with one valence electron. Which of these elements has properties similar to sodium?
Neurons are cells of the nervous system that send and receive signals. From which portion of a cell does a neuron send a signal?
After fields of crops are harvested, parts of the plants remain on the ground. For many years, farmers have mixed these plant remains into the soil. Which most likely results from this practice?
Dalmatian dogs sometimes become deaf due to a recessive trait they may inherit. For this reason, some Dalmatian owners will not let their dogs have puppies if they are deaf. Allowing only Dalmatians that can hear to produce offspring is an example of
Which of these would help determine the changes in a plant species over geologic time?
The rate at which a wave passes through a medium is known as its
A bee depends on certain flowers for food. The flowers depend on the bee to
Which health issue can be caused directly by a mutation resulting in a continuously growing and dividing cell?
Which type of light can cause severe eye damage if it is viewed directly?
Which is a mineral that forms through evaporative processes?
Which atmospheric gas has the greatest effect on the weather conditions associated with an air mass?
What is an example of a force producing heat?
What virus structure is similar in function to a cell membrane?
What aspect of the DNA molecule encodes hereditary information concerning an organism's traits?
If Jessica has light eyes (bb) and both of her parents have dark eyes (Bb), which statement is true?
The fossils of extinct sea animals called trilobites are found in Ohio. This means Ohio was once covered by
A student reaches into a bag of objects. Which property of the objects can be observed by using only the sense of touch?
According to the rock cycle, when liquid magma cools into a solid, what is formed?
Which of the following statements best describes photosynthesis?
What part of a plant needs sunlight to do its job?
To make an electromagnet, a conductor should be coiled around -
Which two solar system objects have the least amount of distance between them?
Just as biologists classify living things, astronomers classify galaxies. What feature is used to classify galaxies?
Which will most likely cause an earthquake?
Over time, coal began to form from
Scientists have monitored the amount of acid rainfall in Frederick County, Maryland, since 1982. Humans in Frederick County are affected by acid rain because acid rain alters
Astronauts weigh more on Earth than they do on the moon because
Which of the following would most likely result in an abnormal chromosome number?
In which group of animals below are all of the members well adapted to living in a forest ecosystem?
A telescope would be most useful in answering which question?
The distance between Richmond and Norfolk is best measured in ___.
A student is hiking through a forest taking pictures for science class. Which picture would most likely be used as an example of human impact on Earth?
Which plant part absorbs minerals?
Which tool would be best to use to record the types of trees found along a riverbank?
On the edge of many deserts, there is a delicate area with abundant vegetation. Sometimes cattle are allowed to graze in these areas. The hooves of the cattle compact the topsoil making it less absorbent. Which environmental concern is most likely to happen at the edge of the desert when cattle graze there?
How do toxic heavy metals move from soil to lakes and streams?
What happens when the Sun's energy warms ocean water?
Which object will conduct electricity, conduct heat, and be attracted to a magnet?
Energy from the Sun changes ocean water to a gas. This sentence describes which step in the water cycle?
Which is an example of symbiosis?
A student is investigating changes in the states of matter. The student fills a graduated cylinder with 50 milliliters of packed snow. The graduated cylinder has a mass of 50 grams when empty and 95 grams when filled with the snow. During which process in the water cycle does snow fall to the ground?
In a food chain, living organisms that eat plants and are a food source for other animals are called
Which of the following happens only during the adult stage of the life cycle of a frog?
In order for nitrogen to be used for growth in organisms, it must be "fixed." When nitrogen is "fixed," it is combined into the form of ammonium or other nitrogen ions. During which type of fixation do organisms and nitrogen interact?
What is the relationship between mass and gravitational pull?
Which enzyme acts first in response to the ingestion of a hamburger patty?
Which part of Earth's structure is composed of a solid mixture of nickel and iron?
A disease that can be passed from one person to another is best described as being
Scientists have observed an increase in global temperatures over the past 100 years. Which phenomena do scientists believe contributes to the increase in temperatures?
Which weather condition commonly occurs along a cold front?
The sound made by crickets occurs when the male crickets rubs its two hind legs together. Which type of energy transformation results in the sound made by crickets?
Salt water, plastic, and helium are all made of
As a satellite falls toward Earth, the gravitational force between the satellite and Earth increases. Which statement best explains why there is an increase in gravitational force?
A student walking quickly while carrying an orange on his lunch tray stops suddenly. The orange will most likely roll off the tray due to
The transfer of a section of DNA from one organism into the DNA of another organism by scientists is called
A student collects data about the dates and strengths of historical earthquakes in Nevada. Which of the following would be best for reporting the strengths of these earthquakes over time?
The major organ systems in the human body interact in many ways. Which of the following statements describes one way that the skeletal system interacts with the circulatory system?
A snowball is made the exact size of a golf ball. Both the golf ball and the snowball are dropped from the same height onto a concrete sidewalk. The snowball breaks, but the golf ball bounces. Which of the following best describes a reason for the difference in reaction of the two balls?
Which of these is the best way to dispose of a potentially dangerous compound?
Asbestos fibers cause a cancer called mesothelioma in humans. The fibers kill cells that line lung tissue by causing programmed-cell death. When cells die this way, they release a chemical, HMG1, which causes an inflammatory response in other cells. During this inflammatory response, cells release chemicals that promote tumor growth. What conclusion can you draw about the chemicals released in the inflammatory response?
Sea lions often swim in the waters of the Pacific Ocean with their flippers sticking above the surface of the water. At other times they may be on land with only their flippers in the water. What would these behaviors most likely accomplish?
If a ball rolls at a constant rate on a flat surface, the motion is due to
Many ways of generating electricity use water. An electrical plant using which energy source changes the temperature of water it uses least?
Environments have changed over millions of years. Which of these would be best for a scientist to study when investigating these environmental changes?
Benjamin Franklin invented many different things. Among his inventions were bifocal glasses, the lightning rod, and a type of iron stove. Which personal quality most likely led to the invention of these things?
Over a long period of time, helpful variations in a species replace the unfavorable ones. This change can lead to
Earth's atmosphere is made of many gases. Which gas do producers use to make food?
Which is an abiotic factor that most limits the number of frogs living in a pond?
To which of the following phenomena do humans contribute the least?
When pressure is released along a fault line, the energy produced spreads as mechanical waves in the form of an earthquake. The mechanical waves transferred to the air become
James recorded a measurement of 3° Celsius. Which tool was James most likely using to measure temperature?
Where in the cell does glycolysis occur?
An architect builds a 1/10 scale model of a house to test the design for sources of heat loss in the winter. Which part of the model would be most important to test with heat-sensing equipment?
A black brick exposed to sunlight becomes warm. How is energy from the Sun transferred to the brick?
Which process transfers heat when particles collide in a solid?
Electrical energy may sometimes be converted to mechanical energy. Which of these appliances converts electrical energy into mechanical energy?
A student wants to compare the masses and volumes of three marbles. Which two instruments should be used?
Humans have a body system that helps to deliver nutrients and hormones, remove excess wastes, and exchange gases. Which body system is most responsible for these functions?
At what temperature does a sample of water most rapidly become a gas?
Beryl finds a rock and wants to know what kind it is. Which piece of information about the rock will best help her to identify it?
What activity must mRNA do in traveling from DNA to protein synthesis sites in eukaryotic cells that does not occur in prokaryotic cells?
Bacteria that enter the body are destroyed by which type of cells?
The electromagnetic spectrum is the complete range of electromagnetic radiation ranging from radio waves to gamma rays. Which type of radiation in this spectrum is associated with observable colors such as red, green, and blue?
When a scientist performs an experiment, there are many changes that can occur. Which observation should she list as a chemical change?
Which type of relationship exists when a certain type of tree's roots need a fungus present in order to grow normally?
The movement of crustal plates results from circulating currents in material beneath the crust of Earth. Which best describes the material which moves the crustal plates?
Which of the following statements best describes how the four planets closest to the Sun are different from the next four planets in our solar system?
Muscle tissues are made of specialized units called
Plants can reproduce sexually and asexually. If one offspring is produced sexually while the other is produced asexually, what will only the sexually produced offspring have?
What tool best allows a geologist to study coastal erosion caused by recent hurricanes?
The burning of fossil fuels affects the atmosphere by
The condition of the air outdoors at a certain time of day is known as
The Halifax River has a major flood plain in Port Orange, Florida. Minerals are deposited into the soil of the flood plain when the water overflows the banks of the river. These minerals can reduce the absorption of the soil in the flood plain and affect the growth of plants in the area. Which best describes the role of the deposited minerals in the flood plain ecosystem?
Sheila ran around a track four times. She felt the need to breathe harder and faster. What were her muscles requiring?
In an energy pyramid, the total energy available for consumption from one trophic level to the next one above it is
Which of the following traits of a dog is inherited from its parents?
Students on a field trip discovered fossilized shark teeth on the side of a cliff. Which conclusion can best be made about the history of the area?
A student placed a small chip of limestone into a hydrochloric acid solution, and carbon dioxide gas was released. The carbon dioxide provided evidence that
What is the body's first layer of defense against germs?
Which of these best describes a species?
Scientists go to a lake once a month to take samples of water. They are most likely studying the
Which of the following groups of materials would most likely be used to build an electromagnet?
The barred owl has been moving into the habitat of the spotted owl. This could lead to a reduction in the spotted owl population if the
Twentieth-century research by such scientists as Jonas Salk on the use of vaccines has reduced the number of people who are infected with
What is the smallest unit of an element that retains the properties of that element?
A body structure under a skunk's tail produces a liquid with a very bad odor. This odor helps the skunk to
Which of the following is an example of sex-linked inheritance?
Volcanic eruptions are caused primarily by the movement of
Which of these best explains why peer review is critical to the advancement of science?
A cell releases energy from storage molecules on the inner surface of the membrane that surrounds the cell. The location of these molecules best indicates that the cell
One substance found on Earth is more stable as an elemental gas than as part of a solid compound. As a result, this substance is very abundant in the atmosphere. Which substance exhibits these traits?
Which property of an object determines how well it conducts electricity?
Which skill is a scientist using when sorting rocks into two groups based on physical appearance?
The major function of the kidneys is to
A streak plate can be used to determine the
Which will increase the energy of motion of water molecules?
How a material responds to heating and cooling tells us about the material's
A balanced chemical equation shows
In which layer of Earth's atmosphere does weather occur?
Which of these is MOST flexible?
Which of these is an abiotic element of a desert ecosystem?
Which statement best explains why ice cubes will melt in a glass of tea?
Rabies can lead to an infection of the brain. This directly causes problems in the
Which of these could only be found inside a plant cell?
Which cellular organelle uses oxygen and glucose to provide energy to the cell?
All living things are composed of cells. Which action is not accomplished by repeated cell division?
At the end of the mitotic cell cycle, a cell divides into two cells. What must happen before the cell divides?
Which of the following best describes a scientific inference?
The oldest Moon rocks have been dated to a time shortly after the estimated date of the formation of our solar system. Approximately how old are these Moon rocks?
A rubber ball rolls across a level surface. The ball will eventually stop rolling due to
Which resource is nonrenewable?
Neutral atoms have an equal number of
Which of the following observations best supports the conclusion that two animal species evolved from a common ancestor in recent geological history?
A body cell that is undergoing abnormal cell division is most likely
Which observation indicates that a chemical reaction has taken place?
Beth and Juan made dough by combining sugar, butter, flour, and salt. Which term best describes the dough?
A family goes on vacation for a week. When they return home they discover that some vegetables in their refrigerator have gone bad. What is the most environmentally responsible thing for them to do with the rotten food?
A sample of the element copper is divided into the smallest particles possible such that each particle is still copper. Each particle can best be described as
Which term best describes the movement of water through cell membranes?
Which generates waves that are capable of traveling through a vacuum?
Which tool would best separate sand and clay mixed in soil?
A volcano found in the center of a tectonic plate tends to be a result of which phenomenon?
A single human body cell typically contains thousands of
Individuals that carry a particular allele may have more descendants than other individuals, resulting in the allele becoming more common. Which process causes random alleles to become more common within a population?
Which statement about the electromagnetic spectrum is accurate?
Which gas could cause rust to form on a metal can?
What causes a change in the speed of a moving object?
Which process releases energy from digested food?
Melinda learned that days in some seasons have more daylight hours than in other seasons. Which season receives the most hours of sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere?
In which of the following taxonomic groups would organisms have the least number of similarities?
Wolves have adapted skills for hunting large hoofed animals such as elk, deer, or moose. Wolves tend to target prey animals that are sick or weak. The wolf benefits from this strategy because it uses less energy to hunt. How would the prey animal population also benefit from this strategy?
Which is an example of metamorphosis?
Bracket fungi grow and feed on the dead wood inside of trees. What is the role of bracket fungi in an ecosystem?
A bicycle is considered a complex machine because it is
In the 1600s Sir Isaac Newton discovered that sunlight is made up of all the colors of the rainbow. What tool did Sir Isaac Newton most likely use to make his discovery?
A plant sitting on a windowsill has wilted. A student explained that the plant wilted because it is in direct sunlight. What is another possible reason the plant wilted?
The bacteria Escherichia coli (E. coli) live in the intestines of humans and make vitamins such as vitamin K and B-complex vitamins. Which would best describe the relationship between E. coli and humans?
Most sand is made of quartz and has a white or brownish color. A student walking on a beach in Hawaii notices the sand is black in color. This sand most likely came from which type of rock?
Human DNA includes a class of genes called "tumor suppressors." What do these genes do in bone cells?
Which is a good practice to help conserve energy?
If a single-celled organism that uses photosynthesis has its source of light removed, it will
One morning, Jane notices drops of water on the outside of a window. Later in the day, she notices that the drops have disappeared. What most likely caused the drops to disappear?
Which plant cell structures capture sunlight to produce sugars?
What is the term for the amount of heat per unit mass required to raise the temperature of a material by one degree Celsius?
Above a continent, a warm air mass slowly passes over a cold air mass. As the warm air begins to cool, clouds form. What will most likely happen next?
In a zoo located in a warm region, which should be included in the polar bear exhibit?
Which of the following is not passed from parents to children?
Which scientist was the first to devise the rules of chemical reactions that are explained by modern atomic theory?
The Arctic hare's brown fur turns white in winter. This adaptation helps the Arctic hare
Which of the following describes condensation?
Diamonds are sometimes used as the tips of drill bits. Which physical property of a diamond MOST likely makes it a good cutting tool?
A student observes a substance that is highly reflective and able to conduct electricity. The substance also has a high melting point. Which is the most likely classification for this substance?
The basic units of structure and function for both plants and animals are
Kelly slides a flat rock across the smooth ice of a frozen pond. The rock slows down after several seconds. What causes the rock to slow down?
A scientist designs a mathematical model of the rock cycle. The model predicts how changes in Earth processes will affect the amounts of different types of rock on Earth. Which quantity should stay the same as Earth processes change?
Which process results in the formation of a new cell with a full set of chromosomes?
When rocks are exposed to wind, rain, heat, ice, or waves, the rocks
What part of the body receives information from the senses?
During a walk through the Arkansas River Valley, Alex found a rock that she determined was a sedimentary rock. Which characteristics of the rock would lead Alex to this conclusion?
Which of these tools is used to measure the melting point of ice?
Between the ages of 8 and 13, young boys' and girls' bodies begin to change. This is the beginning point of children becoming adults. During these years, the endocrine system releases certain types of hormones. What is most likely being regulated by this system?
Most of the mass of the atom consists of
An increase in tourism and agriculture in the Florida Everglades most likely had which effect?
In which part of a tree does photosynthesis most likely take place?
When two nitrogen atoms combine, they form a
When forest trees are cleared from the land, and trees are not replanted, which of the following will most likely occur?
Barney is a cat. Which trait was made by his environment?
Weathering causes rocks and minerals to break into smaller pieces. Which event is the best example of weathering?
Students were investigating the relationship between the length and period of a pendulum. They made a pendulum by using string to suspend a 0.5-kg mass from a fixed support. The students changed the length of the string and measured the time it took for the pendulum to complete ten cycles of motion. By dividing each time measurement by ten, they were able to calculate the period of the pendulum. What was the independent variable?
Which most accurately describes all behavior?
The formation of an ionic bond involves the
Which of the following is the best example of potential energy?
Astronomers measure distances using very large units called light years. Which distance between celestial objects would most likely be measured in light years?
Which characteristic of a plant would best help it survive in a very dry climate?
Which of the following laboratory practices should be avoided?
Which is the best reason for planting a tree away from a sidewalk?
The life cycle of some plants includes the process of pollination. Pollination is helped by
A wire is wrapped around a metal nail and connected to a battery. If the battery is active, the nail will
The numbat, a small Australian marsupial, requires fallen logs and dead trees for shelter and for its primary food, termites. Loss of old-growth forests containing logs and dead trees could threaten the numbat with extinction. What would be the best method to protect the numbat from extinction?
When a predator feeding on certain prey is removed from the environment, which variable will most likely determine whether or not the prey will survive?
If you bounce a rubber ball on the floor, it goes up and then comes down. What causes the ball to come down?
Persians are one of several breeds of domestic cat, Felis catus. Which attribute can be used to classify organisms as Felis catus?
Most South American monkeys have color vision. But the members of one genus, Aotus , also known as "owl monkeys," do not have color vision. Scientists think that the genus evolved from monkeys that did have color vision. The ability to see color was lost when it was no longer helpful. Which other trait of the genus would contribute most to making color vision unimportant?
Which organelle in a plant cell captures sunlight and converts the energy into food?
The force necessary to keep planets in orbit around the Sun is
Which of these geologic features results from tectonic plates slowly moving over a hot spot?
The weather forecast indicates that a warm front will be moving into the area in the next 24 hours. Which type of weather will most likely result?
Flexibility is a physical property of some matter. Which of these materials best demonstrates the property of flexibility?
Which of these structures is produced in an ovary?
What is the function of skin on the human body?
Students run laps around the track in physical education class. After a few laps, the students' breathing gets heavier, and their pace begins to slow. The students are most likely slowing down because
The Periodic Table is arranged in rows and columns. From left to right along a row, the atomic number in each column
Which of these gases, on average, has the lowest volume in the atmosphere of Earth?
The most significant human-induced impact on Earth's atmosphere comes from the use of which energy resource?
The building of houses in Maryland uses many different materials. Which building material is made of a renewable natural resource?
Which tool would best help a student closely observe the smallest living thing in a drop of pond water?
Planting certain crop plants in a field causes a disruption of the natural nitrogen cycle in that field. Which outcome would this disruption most DIRECTLY cause in the field over time?
Sally noticed that there was a decline in the number of eggs her hens were laying. She decided to investigate if the decline might be caused by the amount of food she was feeding the hens. Which would be the dependent (responding) variable in Sally's investigation?
Which measurement is best expressed in light-years?
In which way are sugars usually transported throughout a pine tree?
Water that has its salt removed before it can be used as drinking water is most likely to have come from
Charged particles formed during a chemical reaction are called
A grocery company found a way to keep fresh foods from spoiling when transporting them long distances. How might this new technology help people in Hawaii?
A student notices a paw print while walking in a park. The paw print could be considered a fossil if the print was in ___.
Which of the following runs ONLY on electricity?
The muscles exert forces on the body and enable movement by
A cold can of juice is removed from the refrigerator and is placed outdoors on a warm day. After several minutes, moisture appears on the outside of the cold can. Which of the following statements best explains why the moisture appears?
Actin filaments are part of the contractile machinery in smooth muscle cells of eukaryotic organisms. Which organelle is responsible for contractile movement in these cells?
A weather balloon is about 2 meters wide when it is near the ground. It grows to about 6 meters wide at higher altitudes. Which change most likely makes the balloon become wider at higher altitudes?
When blood that is high in carbon dioxide exits the heart, it immediately enters which body system?
One method used to speed up the rate of a chemical reaction is to
In an electric motor, electrical energy is converted into
Diamonds are formed when carbon is placed under extreme heat and pressure. This process occurs
Sonar helps people find which information about an object?
Which description is an example of camouflage?
Which object is a planet found in the Milky Way Galaxy?
There are many different types of living cells on Earth. Which of these characteristics do all living cells have in common?
Some scientists have suggested that the Moon was formed when a large body struck Earth and broke off a piece of Earth billions of years ago. Which observation would best support this suggestion?
The Milky Way Galaxy looks like a band of light across the sky. Which observation would provide the best view of this band of light without a telescope?
The use of the Internet has changed life for many people by directly allowing them to
Which best describes the Sun?
The relationships among elements were used to organize the elements systematically long before the behavior of electrons was understood. Which scientist is credited with this organization of elements?
Planets in our solar system have different solar years. Which statement explains the cause of an Earth solar year?
At 10 A.M. the Sun is shining on a puddle of water on the road. At 2 P.M. the Sun is still shining and the puddle has disappeared. What happened to the water?
A plant growing on a hillside has a stem that curves so that the plant is vertical. This curve is not observed in plants of the same species growing on level ground. Which statement best explains the curved stem of the plant growing on the hillside?
Just under half the oil that enters ocean water comes from natural oil seeps on the ocean floor. Just over half the oil in the oceans comes from human activities. Which human activity contributes the most oil to the oceans?
A teacher carefully places some objects into very hot water. After one minute, which item is most likely too hot to touch?
Ocean currents, prevailing wind patterns, and other atmospheric disturbances are initially caused by which of these?
Clouds and fog are made up of
What is the main function of chlorophyll in plants?
Which is a step in the process of photosynthesis?
Some scientists have suggested that pandas may be more closely related to raccoons than to bears. What could scientists compare between pandas and the raccoons to help classify the panda more accurately?
Why do astronauts need oxygen in the backpacks of their spacesuits?
Most hormones are produced by which human organ system?
A student plans to conduct an experiment to see how quickly mice learn to navigate a maze to reach a reward at the other end. Which of these will help lead to the most accurate conclusion?
In areas where limestone is present underneath the soil, continued rains can alter the limestone formation. The limestone can change to a highly porous formation that can lead to the formation of caves and sinkholes. Which process is directly responsible for changing the limestone?
All of the following can become fossils except
Which source of information will most likely provide a student with the most accurate information about the landforms, natural resources, climate, and precipitation of Nevada?
Ocean tides result mainly from
A basketball bounces on the gym floor nine times and finally comes to a rest. Which of these best explains why the basketball rises to a lower height each time it bounces?
How does the latitude of a region affect its climate?
When notebook paper is folded to make an airplane, what physical property of the paper changes?
Don throws a ball in the air. The ball comes back to the ground because
Which external stimulus causes a plant to bend toward it?
The large-scale development of personal automobiles started in the early 1900s. Which of the following was a major cost associated with the efficient use of these automobiles?
A prairie dog living in a community barks loudly. Other prairie dogs nearby know that danger is near and quickly go underground to hide. Which sense are these prairie dogs using to communicate?
One example of matter is
Which object refracts light rays?
What will happen to a cell that is placed in a hypotonic saline solution?
A butterfly lays an egg. The egg hatches into a larva. The larva becomes a pupa and then changes into a butterfly. This process is called
The small stone plant has leaves that look like pebbles or stones. This characteristic helps the plant
Which of these is an example of a non-contact force acting on an object?
What happens to the chemical energy in methane's bonds when methane reacts with oxygen and forms H_{2}O and CO_{2}?
What is a common use of the mineral graphite?
Seafloor spreading provides evidence of which of the following Earth processes?
An object is moving in a straight line at a constant speed. What will happen to the object if no outside force acts on the object?
Mr. Harris mows his lawn twice each month. He claims that it is better to leave the clippings on the ground. Which long term effect will this most likely have on his lawn?
Some researchers predicted that mice could learn their way around a maze quickly if given a food reward. After many trials, the results came back but differed from the hypothesis. How should the researchers proceed?
There are many different processes that take place in plant and animal cells. Cellular respiration is one of those processes. What is the purpose of cellular respiration?
Christina kicks a ball. The ball moves faster when she kicks it on the concrete sidewalk than when she kicks it on the grass. Why does the ball travel slower on the grass than the sidewalk?
Immediately before and after running a 50 metre race, your pulse and breathing rates are taken. What changes would you expect to find?
Which steps in the water cycle most directly cause floods?
An engineer tests three new ceramic parts, each of which could potentially replace a steel part inside an automotive engine. The three parts, identical in size, are each made of a different ceramic compound. The parts are heated to the same temperature and placed under the same stress loads. At the end of the test, the engineer concludes Part B is the best for the job. What was the independent variable in this test?
Specialized cells protect the human body from disease-causing microbes by
The frost line of the solar system divides the terrestrial plants from the gas-giant planets. What elements make up most of the core of the planets orbiting outside of the frost line?
How do warm ocean currents move to cooler ocean regions of Earth?
In order to build a wooden table, which of the following is the best thing to do first?
Which object most likely has magnetic properties?
A student is conducting an investigation on static electricity. The student has three balloons and rubs two of them on a piece of wool. The student then touches each balloon to a wall to observe if static electricity would cause the balloon to stick. What is the independent variable in this investigation?
The order of the elements in the periodic table is determined by their
An increase in greenhouse gases, which are believed to cause global warming, is due to a change in which occurrence?
A laser beam is aimed at four different objects. Through which of these objects will the laser beam pass and be refracted?
Scientists track an icy object with an orbit that ranges from the Kuiper Belt to a path between Earth and the Sun. How would this object best be classified?
A student is given a sample of an unknown liquid to test in the laboratory. The student thinks that the liquid is water. Which of the following physical properties of the sample is most helpful to determine if the liquid is water?
After a period of steady increase, the rate of coal consumption was 50% higher during 2009 than it was during the year 2000. If this trend continues, which impact will coal consumption most likely have on the environment after the year 2010?
Which invention uses natural magnetism?
Two workers are using a scaffold. One worker weighs 180 lbs. and the other weighs 200 lbs. Impact effects are assumed to increase the live load of the workers' weight by 25 percent. What is the resultant maximum live load, in pounds, that can be expected from the two workers supported by the scaffold?
Some sinkholes and caves are created when water dissolves certain rocks and minerals below ground. Which two parts of the water cycle are most directly responsible for the formation of sinkholes and caves?
A longitudinal wave, such as a sound wave, can travel through
A student removed a wool hat from her head. Her hair stood up from static electricity. What did her hat do to cause this?
Which process below is an example of an endothermic process?
A sodium (Na) atom contains 11 protons, 12 neutrons, and 11 electrons. In order to make the sodium ion Na+, what must occur to the sodium atom?
Which of these statements best describes the rock cycle?
The disruption of which cell function leads to gene mutations that result in cancer?
In photosynthesis, plants use chlorophyll to produce
One difference between the Moon and Earth is that the Moon
In an atom, the electrons can be found
What event is most likely responsible for a rapid change at the surface of Earth?
Biotic nitrogen fixation is performed by certain
After rubbing a rubber brush on wool, Gilbert is able to use the brush to pick up small strips of paper. What causes the paper to be attracted to the brush?
The influence of the Moon on the tides on Earth is greater than that of the Sun. Which best explains this?
If a student wants to measure the efficiency of an incandescent light bulb in a laboratory, which instrument would most likely be used to determine heat loss?
What is the most likely reason the giant sloth became extinct in North America and Cuba?
When compared to the Sun, red dwarf stars are
What energy change takes place when a piece of bread is toasted in a toaster?
In what way can forest fires affect the lithosphere?
Which body system is responsible for breaking down food into molecules that it absorbs?
Which object is best used to demonstrate the bending of light as it passes through a substance?
When an earthquake occurs, the speed of the seismic waves changes as they
What force is needed to help stop a child from slipping on ice?
Many animals are still being hunted for their fur. Because of this, many of these animals are in danger of
Solar energy is referred to as the energy of the future because
Which processes occur in all species of animals?
What evidence is there that the gravitational pull of the Moon has a direct effect on Earth?
Which structure best protects a cactus from being eaten by animals?
What is the primary function of macrophages?
In the heart there is a group of specialized cells that regulates the frequency of the heartbeat. During strenuous exercise, the group of cells will most likely
Which human body systems are most directly involved when a person is walking?
Calcium carbonate (CaCO_{3}) is considered a compound because it is made up of two or more
Modern factories and industrial plants have filters that remove much of the sulfur from their emissions before it reaches the atmosphere. This design feature helps most in reducing the contribution of factories to which environmental problem?
Which condition is most likely to cause the formation of a temperature inversion?
A young boy and his brothers have green eyes. This trait is best described as
Which term best describes body system defects that offspring may express when born?
Which type of precipitation consists of frozen rain drops?
A nuclear reaction, such as those which occur in a nuclear power plant, can be classified as what type of reaction?
The force of gravitational attraction between Earth and any object on Earth is measured as
Which example shows a chemical change to food during digestion?
The air in front of a meteor is compressed as it passes through the atmosphere of Earth. This causes the meteor to
Martina only washes her sweater after she has worn it several times. Martina is helping the environment by ___.
Fruit flies reproduce by sexual reproduction. What percent of genes does a fertilized egg of a fruit fly receive from one parent?
The forelimb of the monkey, bat, penguin, and alligator look very different on the outside, but their skeletal structures are similar. This evidence suggests that these animals
What allows two students standing ten feet apart to hear each other talk?
What should a student do if he gets a red, itchy rash after a class field trip?
The presence of an animal fossil in a rock gives evidence of
Which action does a kitten learn from its mother?
Support cables in a suspension bridge are most stressed by which of the following forces?
What is a main feature of plains?
Decomposers are important in the food chain because they
Bridge inspectors have determined that a bridge is unsafe. Which of the following is the BEST design process the company should use to correct the problem?
Which planet has characteristics that make it the most likely planet for the discovery of extra-terrestrial life?
Organisms can be classified according to the flow of energy in a food chain. Which is the correct order of the flow of energy?
Which of the following can make objects repel each other?
Of the choices listed, what is the best way to conserve water in a home?
Martin grew some bean plants. He made a list of what the bean plants needed to survive and grow. Which gas do the plants need when they make their own food?
Which factor causes global wind patterns?
The statement "gold is more dense than lead" is
Which process contributes most to the formation of a sinkhole?
Which of these questions is best answered by observing the habitat of an insect?
Which characteristic of frogs is an adaptation to living in water?
In the construction of a house, the words excavation, slab, and footing are associated with the
Habitat becomes a major factor in the extinction of a species when
Every copy of a particular protein manufactured by a cell shows the same incorrect amino acid at the same point in its structure. According to the central dogma of molecular biology, in which structure does this error originate?
Some molecules used to manufacture plastic objects are long and tangled. They straighten when force is applied to them and then return to their shorter, tangled shape. Which common object is most likely made using such molecules?
Water that evaporates from lakes and streams condenses into clouds and later falls as rain. The property of water that is demonstrated is the ability to
The top layers of soil are important because they -
A scientific guess about the cause and effect of an event is called
What features do all insects have?
How does a mushroom obtain energy?
Three main sequence stars are being compared. Which characteristic would these three stars most likely have in common?
Some natural disasters can have a large effect on the global climate. Which type of natural disaster would produce the greatest decrease in solar radiation reaching the surface of Earth for the longest period of time?
What object is made of hot gas and is the most massive object in our solar system?
Which of the following is a slow process that changes Earth's surface?
Which of the following is the greatest source of wild fish for human populations?
Which best describes the characteristics of a river basin?
Tides on Earth are influenced more by the Moon than the Sun because the Moon is
When dense, cold air pushes beneath warmer atmospheric air, the lighter, warmer air rises. As this air rises into the atmosphere, it cools and some of the water vapor in it condenses. Which of the following will most likely form as this occurs?
Herbivores that evolved on grassy plains are likely to naturally select for traits different than herbivores that evolved in rain forests. Which trait is a plains herbivore most likely to develop over thousands of years?
A student writes the following statement in a journal: "It was 84°F at 3 p.m. on Tuesday in the schoolyard." This statement best describes which system?
When using a hot plate, students should not
Which subatomic particles are involved in the nuclear fusion that powers the Sun?
What do all vertebrate animals have in common?
When astronomers want to measure the distance between nearby stars, they often use
Which of these is the best evidence that Earth's continental landmasses drifted apart over time?
In humans, where does the absorption of food into the blood stream mainly take place?
Which human activity contributes to the formation of acid rain?
What procedure should be performed after any handling of a plant sample in a lab?
In which of the following cases would a decrease in friction be most beneficial?
Decayed prehistoric plants have helped in the formation of
Oxygen and sugar are the products of
Scientists often work together to solve a problem. Sometimes they work in laboratories. Sometimes they are outside doing fieldwork. The chart provides a list of some careers in science. Which scientists might work together to save a polluted wetland?
How many chromosomes are found in a fertilized human egg cell?
Peptide bonds in proteins can be broken down by the enzyme peptidase. Adrian orders a hamburger and French fries for lunch. He adds cheese and mayonnaise to his hamburger, and then sits down to eat lunch with his friends. Which structure would most likely result from the action of peptidase in Adrian's small intestine?
Cows are farm animals that eat only plants. Which of these kinds of living things is a cow?
Bone cells need nutrients. Which two systems get nutrients to bone cells?
Which describes a material that is not a food?
An example of a calcium carbonate deposit in the lithosphere is
The color in a Tortoiseshell cat can only be produced by two X chromosomes. This would mean that these types of cats are always
Which is the most appropriate SI unit to use for expressing the mass of an automobile?
Some scientists think their new car fuel will produce fewer chemicals than burning gasoline. The scientists test their hypothesis by performing several trials to compare the fuels. If the results of the trials agree with their hypothesis, in which area will their research most likely help?
A student sets up an investigation to test the strength of magnets. He has several magnets of different sizes, shapes, and masses. He uses the magnets to lift metal paper clips. How is the strength of a magnet defined in the investigation?
Which of these is the best example of organisms interacting with each other in an ecosystem?
A television commercial claims that an all-natural cereal will provide the daily nutrition needed for adults. Which information on the cereal box best supports this claim?
Which process in an apple tree primarily results from cell division?
Which of these must be absorbed by animal cells in order to grow?
In which type of blood vessel is blood pressure normally monitored?
Which of the following correctly explains how atmospheric nitrogen is converted to nitrogen compounds used by living organisms?
A sailboat travels 35 km in 5 hr. Which of the following describes the motion of the sailboat?
A movie studio will use two methods of communication, television and the Internet, to advertise a new movie. Which of the following must both methods of communication use in order to show the advertisements to viewers around the world?
A medium-sized star in the middle of its life cycle, such as the Sun, is most likely to emit which color of light?
A satellite image can help scientists locate the area where two plates have diverged by showing the existence of
Which device would most likely be used to produce light energy?
Scientists at a local university have been studying the impact that people have on Earth. One of the areas being studied is how the burning of fossil fuels affects the environment. Which effect of fossil fuel burning have the scientists most likely evaluated?
Which statement best explains why photosynthesis is the foundation of most food webs?
Which piece of safety equipment is used to keep mold spores from entering the respiratory system?
Meiosis is a type of cell division in which germ cells divide to produce haploid cells. Where does meiosis occur?
Which characteristic describes the texture of a kitten's fur?
Which best describes the structure of an atom?
To express the distance between the Milky Way galaxy and other galaxies, the most appropriate unit of measurement is the
A student has just completed a laboratory activity. What is the last action that the student should perform before leaving the lab area?
Students are investigating the effects of different fertilizers on plant growth. Which units would be best to measure the mass of the fertilizer used?
Plants use sunlight to make
Which of these correctly identifies the way materials are transported in a plant?
When trees develop leaves in the spring, 10 changes occur on the forest floor. Why does the development of leaves cause changes on the forest floor?
The circulatory system and the endocrine system work together in the human body. Which describes one way in which these systems interact?
A student throws a ball into the air. While the ball travels up, the speed of the ball decreases. What force causes the ball to slow while traveling up?
Which of these will most likely harm a habitat?
All living and nonliving material is composed of
Which process best explains how the Grand Canyon became so wide?
As global temperatures increase, certain organisms will be more affected than others. The changes associated with global warming may result in an increase in sea level. Which organisms will be affected most as a result of the change in sea level?
A dish of sugar water was left on a window sill. One week later, there were only sugar crystals left in the dish. The water was gone. The best explanation for the appearance of sugar crystals is
Using a softball bat to hit a softball is an example of using which simple machine?
When an igneous intrusion comes into contact with surrounding rock, the surrounding rock will
A research scientist writes a paper on the initial regrowth of a forest after a fire has damaged the entire ecosystem. Which title would be best for the paper?
Where do plants get most of the energy they need to live and grow?
Which is a statement about climate?
While on a movie set, a stuntman jumps off the roof of a building. As he falls toward an airbag, what is increasing?
Jessica wants to see cells in an oak tree leaf. Which tool is best for Jessica to use to see the cells?
Biologists conduct investigations to learn about living organisms. Which method helps reduce bias during an investigation?
Which factor is most likely to cause the number of rabbits living in an area to increase?
Seeds that remain inactive until the right conditions of light, water, and soil are present are called ___.
What allows a light bulb to give off light?
What causes sound?
Photosynthesis occurs in which of these organisms?
In order for cells to grow at a normal rate, they must
Marshall learned that plants need a substance from the air to make their own food. What does a plant take from the air in the presence of sunlight?
Antarctica is a continent at Earth's south pole. Fossils of tropical fern plants were discovered in Antarctica even though these plants do not grow there today. Which conclusion does the fossil evidence best support?
Which two theories of Moon formation propose that much or all of the material comprising the Moon came from Earth?
When white, fluffy clouds appear in Massachusetts, the weather that day will MOST LIKELY be
Plants and animals are composed of organic compounds. Which of the following are the common elements found in organic compounds?
New research uncovers information that proves that the data from an old theory is partially incorrect. What should the scientific community do about the old theory?
Which is the greatest benefit of sexual reproduction?
The speed at which sound waves travel depends on the
Which scientist is credited with discovering the first four moons of Jupiter?
During science class, a teacher explains that the samples the students are studying are made of two or more minerals. What are the students studying?
When the Northern Hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun causing the rays of light to hit Earth at large angles, which season occurs?
A scientist found fossils of ocean shells on a mountain top. Based on this find, which statement can be made?
A student sees many plants around a pond. The student can determine which plants are nonvascular by
Darryl learns that freezing temperatures may help cause weathering. Which statement explains how freezing temperatures most likely cause weathering?
A bond is formed when an electron is transferred from a sodium atom to a chlorine atom. What happens to the sodium atom during this process?
A group of fish was released into a local lake. This species of fish had never lived in the lake before. Scientists want to collect data on how the lake's ecosystem is affected by the new fish. Which method of data collection will give the most accurate results?
On a career day at school, an X-ray technician discusses her daily work with the class. Which equipment would she most likely say she uses on a regular basis to help ensure the safety of patients?
In the United States, windmills have been used for farming for hundreds of years. Which simple machine is the most important part of a windmill?
Which tools are needed to measure the effects of friction on a block of wood?
Planets outside of our solar system have been detected. What suggested the presence of a planet outside of our solar system?
During which process are pieces of rock material being moved over Earth's surface by water and wind?
The Apollo 11 mission was able to retrieve samples of the Moon's surface because it was the first mission to have astronauts
A student mixes a teaspoon of sugar in a large glass of water. What happens to the sugar when it is mixed with the water?
Particle accelerators, such as the Large Hadron Collider in Europe, accelerate subatomic particles to great speeds. These particles move in opposite directions at nearly the speed of light and collide into one another to simulate conditions that were present as the universe formed. Which property of matter in the initial moments of the universe are these accelerators designed to simulate?
A doorbell circuit converts electrical energy into mechanical energy. The mechanical energy is in the form of vibrations that ultimately produce
Which factor determines if two individuals are members of the same species?
Which of the following planets is always closer to the Sun than it is to Earth?
Cells need nutrients for energy. Which system is responsible for breaking down food to provide cellular energy?
During which activity should a student wear goggles?
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a soil bacterium that is toxic to certain insects. Genes from this bacterium have been inserted into cotton to make Bt cotton. Farmers that use Bt cotton would most likely use less of which of the following?
A student examined a rock sample and described it as having particles of various colors that were 1 millimeter to 12 millimeters in size. The student was making
What are genes composed of?
In a classroom demonstration, a teacher pours sulfuric acid on some granulated sugar in a beaker. The sugar turns yellow and then black. Smoke rises and a strong smell is released. This demonstration is an example of what kind of change?
Marta studied different forms of energy. Which two types of energy travel in waves?
The tops of some mountains are sharp and pointed, while the tops of others are smooth and rounded. This difference was most likely caused by
A student suggests to the school board that they use a renewable energy source. The student suggests they use
Solar radiation provides more heat near the equator than near the poles on Earth. The greatest amount of heat is moved away from the equator by
Which human activity will help conserve Earth's natural resources?
Which characteristic helps some animals defend themselves against predators?
Most plants begin their life cycle as ___.
Erin wants to make a strong, light chair. Which natural material should she use?
Jonathon was studying bears. He found out that bears are born with some behaviors and learn others from their environment. Which behavior does a bear most likely inherit?
A group of the same species of fish swim together to increase an individual's
In the oxygen cycle, which group of organisms replenishes a large portion of the atmospheric oxygen supply?
Some antibiotics used to treat infections in humans are also used to treat chickens, but some groups oppose this practice. The overuse of the antibiotics will most likely influence the natural selection of which type of organisms?
A student performs a lab investigation by measuring the average time it takes for a toy car to travel 10 meters. Why is it best to perform the experiment in three trials?
A scientist finds a metamorphic rock formation next to a magma chamber and determines that it was originally a sedimentary rock formation. He concludes that the temperature of the magma chamber caused the rock formation to become metamorphic. Which is another reliable explanation of how the rock formation was changed?
Earth orbiting the Sun causes
The cycle of night and day on Earth is a result of
Which of these traits is most influenced by environment?
Which statement describes a characteristic of a gas that has a significant effect on the climates of both Earth and Venus?
DNA technology has improved greatly in the last twenty years. Which task has been made easier by the development of DNA technology?
Which condition is necessary for metamorphic rocks to form?
Which event helps to renew a resource?
Which part of a plant takes in water and nutrients from the soil?
A certain type of hybrid car utilizes a braking system in which energy is recovered and stored in batteries. This is an example of which type of energy conversion?
Clownfish take shelter in the tentacles of sea anemones and keep sea anemones clean. Which type of relationship does this represent?
Some animals have behaviors that help them find food when little is available. Which best describes an animal with this type of behavior?
Part of a student's experiment is to measure changes in wind speed several hours before a storm. What piece of equipment should the student use?
An organism is born with a genetic abnormality not present in any of its ancestors. This abnormality is most likely the result of
The length of one day on Earth is determined by how long it takes
When a rock is placed in a graduated cylinder containing water, the height of the water will
A student heats the same amount of two different liquids over Bunsen burners. Each liquid is at room temperature when the student begins. If liquid 1 has a higher specific heat than liquid 2, then liquid 1 will
Through which activity do animals get the carbon that is needed for their bodies?
Scientists have discovered organisms that thrive in hot water that is 90°C (194°F) and do not need sunlight or oxygen to live. Into which kingdom would the scientists classify these organisms?
A cook touches a hot stove and quickly moves his hand away. What are the two primary body systems that work together to produce this response?
Which statement correctly describes both gases and liquids?
When the soil is saturated, earthworms move to the top of the soil to obtain oxygen. This behavior is evidence of which biological concept in earthworms?
Which of the following is more likely to occur in a plant cell than in an animal cell?
Earth revolves around the sun. The amount of time needed for Earth to complete one revolution around the sun is approximately
Excess nitrogen fertilizers sometimes drain into waterways that flow into the Chesapeake Bay. This nitrogen may cause algae blooms, which reduce dissolved oxygen in the water. How does nitrogen negatively affect the Chesapeake Bay?
Mount Arenal, a volcano in Costa Rica, is erupting. Heat is being released during the eruption. What is the source of the heat?
Which statement describes how the umbilical cord supports a developing fetus?
Which two human body systems are most responsible for getting oxygen to cells?
In their science classroom, Sam and Julia cross a heterozygous tall (Tt) pea plant with a homozygous short (tt) pea plant. What ratio represents the results Sam and Julia can expect?
When atmospheric carbon dioxide increases, some of the carbon dioxide dissolves in the ocean causing the ocean to become
Over time, dried lava from an old volcano is worn down and broken into small pieces. When these pieces pile up and are cemented together to form new rock, how would this new rock be classified?
When potassium and bromine atoms form chemical bonds, which of these is produced?
How often does Earth rotate on its axis?
The elements that make up the atmosphere of Earth can be listed as percentages or can be shown in a graph. Which type of graph would best show this information?
Animals give off carbon dioxide that plants take in through leaves. What do plants give off as a result of photosynthesis that animals need to breathe?
Air is composed of many different substances. Which of the following components of air is a compound rather than an element?
Which factor is responsible for the presence of equatorial deserts?
The ash borer moth looks similar to a wasp, but it does not have the ability to sting. This adaptation most likely helps the moth survive because
Which organ system communicates with cells in muscle tissue so that the muscles contract or relax, allowing the body to move?
Which device produces mechanical energy?
A beach is formed when sediment is deposited along a shoreline. What would most likely happen if rivers that empty into the ocean were dammed?
Due to extreme pressure, the inner core of Earth is
The speed and general direction of motion of a galaxy relative to the Earth can be determined by
What are the three common states of matter?
What is the primary reason for breaking down food molecules?
Topsoil is considered to be most fertile when it has a
When chemicals in the atmosphere dissolve in water droplets, they precipitate with the water and pollute water reservoirs on Earth. The pollutants enter the food chain when aquatic organisms absorb them. Which of these pollutants eventually contaminates fish after coal is burned?
An atom has a mass of 24 and a nuclear charge of 12. Which statement about the atom is accurate?
Which is an example of a renewable energy resource?
The compression of matter due to gravitational attraction increased as the protoplanets formed. What was a result of this compression within each protoplanet?
The construction of Hoover Dam on the Colorado River resulted in abundant freshwater and electrical power for the region. Which of these is a disadvantage of the construction of Hoover Dam?
If you place a thermometer into a glass of boiling water, what temperature should the thermometer read?
What characteristic of carbon [C] makes it essential to living organisms?
Scientists found evidence of a fish that lived millions of years ago. The fish had features that were possibly used to move on land. This fish is now extinct. What scientific evidence did the scientists most likely find that confirmed the existence of this fish?
What is the smallest unit of a chemical compound that still has the properties of that compound?
A student is investigating in which type of soil a plant will grow best. Which should the student measure to answer the question?
An animal has scales and uses only its lungs to exchange gases. What is the animal most likely to be classified as?
How are igneous and sedimentary rocks similar?
When both a dominant and recessive gene are present, which of the following is true?
Squirrels in cold climates gather and store food for winter. The squirrels sometimes bury nuts and then do not return for them. These nuts can grow to become trees. This chain of events is an example of
Kurt drinks frozen fruit juice from a small cup. He measures the amount of fruit juice in the cup. Which property is Kurt measuring?
A simple machine that has a mechanical advantage equal to 1 would most likely be used to
Roberto is sliding down a plastic slide on the playground. After he reaches the ground, he feels a small electric shock when he touches a piece of metal. What has been built up on his body that causes the shock?
Plants grow best in soils that are rich in which of the following?
The rate of acceleration of an object is determined by the mass of the object and
Some aquifers are composed of limestone and dolomite. Which process increases the open spaces of the aquifer formation?
Leather basketballs are made for indoor use on smooth surfaces. Rubber basketballs are made for use on many different surfaces. Which of the following properties of rubber makes it better than leather for use on many different surfaces?
On a field trip in a wooded area, you see a small, strange object. You wonder whether it is a live animal. The best way to find out is to observe the object to see if it
Ethanol is a type of alcohol made from plants. Sugarcane and corn, which are both used in foods such as cereals and breads, are used to make ethanol. Burning ethanol provides a clean source of energy because the products of ethanol are water and carbon dioxide. Therefore, mixing ethanol with gasoline reduces harmful waste products. In the 1970s, many Brazilians drove cars with engines that used an ethanol gasoline mixture. This alternative fuel conserved the limited supply of gasoline available at that time. In the 1990s, gasoline became cheaper than ethanol, and Brazilians returned to driving more gasoline-fueled cars. Recently, Brazilians started driving more cars that use an ethanol-gasoline mixture. Ethanol is a good alternative fuel because it
A whistle produces a sound because blowing air in the whistle causes
Each year the Earth moves once around
According to Newton's first law of motion, what counteracts gravity to keep a satellite in orbit?
How do plants get water and minerals?
A cell's chromosomes contain
Which of these events is an example of a change in climate?
Which object works best when reflecting light?
A wetland was drained to build a mall. Two years later, there were no more toads in that area. Why did the toads disappear?
Which elements are found to the right of the zigzag line in the periodic table?
Miranda learned how the human body carries out life functions. Which is the most basic level of organization in the human body?
Pollutants, such as motor oil and gasoline, are sometimes leaked onto roads by vehicles. How do these pollutants most likely affect the environment?
Which of the following objects is probably the most flexible?
A student practicing for the outdoor track team begins to sweat. To what stimulus is the body responding?
What repeating cycle is responsible for the four seasons that occur on Earth?
Which of these systems functions to protect and support vital organs?
Which characteristic would best help a rabbit survive in snow?
Scientists are studying a pond. Which property can the scientists measure to understand the amount of energy held by the lake water?
Russell wants to observe changes in nature over the next few months. What can a thermometer help Russell investigate?
The egg stage in the life cycle of a bird is most like which phase in the life cycle of certain types of flowers?
Peristalsis helps move nutrients through parts of the body by using wavelike contractions. In which system is the function used?
Which is the best way to help prevent the flu from becoming a pandemic?
Which theory states that the universe originated as a single mass?
As two continental plates collide, the edges of the plates are crumpled and uplifted. Which of these landforms is most likely a result of this type of collision?
During a walk in the woods, Mandy finds a plant structure that had fallen onto the trail. Mandy can tell the object contained seeds, and thinks it came from a flowering plant instead of a conifer. How can she determine if the object came from a flowering plant?
The esophagus, stomach, and small intestine are parts of which body system?
Which of the following is a chemical property of silver?
If the climate in an area changed over time to become very cold, which change would most likely help a species living there to survive?
A broken bone heals through the process of
Which is the best example of an object with kinetic energy?
Lions tend to prey on primary consumers like zebras and gazelles. If there were a sudden decline in a population of lions, which ecological imbalance would most likely occur in the habitat?
Which of the following could help to reduce a home heating bill in winter?
Elizabeth uses a specific type of whistle to call her dogs. The noise made by the whistle is heard by the dogs but cannot be heard by the human ear. Which statement best describes why humans cannot hear the sound made by the whistle?
Use the information to answer the question. Over the last 150 years, the use of fossil fuels has increased, resulting in more carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some scientists think that these atmospheric gases will result in global warming. Scientists have recorded data on global temperature changes and have predicted possible changes in sea level that may affect Maryland residents. Which action helps reduce global warming?
As members of a food web, humans are considered to be
Which of the following statements best describes the role of gravity in the formation of stars?
What is the name of the process in which igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks are converted into one another in stages?
What is happening when rocks are broken down by both physical and chemical changes?
In a laboratory procedure, students added sodium hydroxide crystals to a beaker of water and allowed the resulting solution to cool. Based on this information, which type of chemical process most likely occurred?
Students are attempting to make a doorbell ring using some wire and a battery. What is needed to make the bell ring?
Which concept was most likely modified due to the invention of the microscope?
Which energy transformation occurs during active transport in a cell?
The nervous system consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves that run throughout the entire body. Which of these is one function of the nervous system?
Which of these is most likely a result of using pesticides on farm crops?
The biological selection of a particular allele for a trait to be passed to offspring has nothing do with the selection of the allele for another trait. Which of the following supports this statement?
Air pollution can influence a person's quality of life. Which best identifies the influence of air pollution?
What information about stars can be learned by using a spectrometer?
Which is the function of the gallbladder?
When trees are removed from a tropical rain forest, other plants and animals are affected. Which statement identifies another change that will most likely occur when a rain forest habitat is destroyed?
A student was given the volume and description of a substance and was asked to determine its density. What information is missing?
A geologist found several types of seashell fossils in a rock layer. Which is the best conclusion about the rock layer?
All of the planets in the solar system formed at about the same time from a large cloud of gas and dust. How is Earth different from other planets in the solar system?
When light reflects off certain crystals in the atmosphere, effects called halos appear. Which substance in the atmosphere forms these crystals?
During which process do animals increase in size?
In what form do plants store the energy produced from sunlight?
Carmine's mother drinks four cans of soft drink each day. After drinking the soft drinks, Carmine's mother should
A student observes different characteristics of a rock. Which observation best describes a fact about the rock?
Xylem cells have very thick walls. They make up most of a tree trunk and its branches. What system in vertebrates provides the same function as the xylem cells in a tree?
At one station in a production line, a worker must drill a hole in each end of wooden boards. At the next station, another worker attaches two of the boards together using metal fasteners that fit in the holes. Which of the following processes will ensure that the wooden boards fit together with the fewest errors?
A student places a ball on the ground and kicks it. The ball moves along the ground. Why does the ball move?
Why do identical twins usually look like each other?
The process by which information is encoded, transmitted, stored, decoded, and retrieved is called
Elements are organized on the periodic table according to
Chromium is characterized by a very high melting point. Use the Periodic Table of the Elements to identify which of these elements most likely has a similar melting point.
A scientist finds a plant and states that it is a new species. Which is the best way to verify that it is a new species?
The bottom of the space shuttle is covered with ceramic tile. This material was chosen because it withstands
What is the effect of absorption of infrared light by human skin?
Some plants need to be in an environment where water drains easily. Which type of soil content will best benefit these plants?
Which of the following statements best describes sandy soils?
What type of rock was the fossil most likely found in?
Which source produces light from nuclear energy?
A student rolls a ball on the ground. Which of these causes the ball to slow down and then stop?
In the human body, the circulatory system works with the respiratory system by
What kind of force do brakes use to stop a moving bicycle?
The first powerful telescopes were built during the early 1600s. Scientists at that time were able to learn more about which subject by using the telescope?
A student wants to perform an experiment to determine what temperature is best for growing tomato plants. Which is the best piece of equipment to use in this experiment to measure the independent variable?
Glaciers are slow-moving sheets of ice found on land. What process occurs when glacial ice is heated to 5° Celsius?
Land subsidence (ground level dropping) is most likely an indication that
The United States government limits the use of certain pesticides through laws passed in the Endangered Species Protection Program. Which is the most likely reason to enforce laws that limit pesticide use?
Refrigerators were invented to keep food cold. This is helpful in
What safety procedure should a student follow when a thermometer is broken during a lab experiment?
Which process is most effective for separating sodium chloride from a saltwater solution?
Clear cutting of old growth forests in Oregon provides lumber for housing. In the process of clear cutting, plant diversity decreases and some organisms are pushed to extinction. Clear cutting is an example of
El Niño is a term that refers to the oceanic phenomenon in which the surface water temperatures increase. The increase in water temperature usually occurs in the tropical Pacific Ocean. Which will most likely occur as a result of this phenomenon to cause environmental changes?
An animal that has thick fur, webbed feet, and blubber would probably live in the
The rover Spirit is a robotic probe that NASA has placed on Mars. The gravitational attraction of Mars is approximately 62% less than that of Earth. Compared to its measurements on Earth, on Mars the probe has
Sal is looking at a map of Massachusetts. He has measured the distance, in inches, from Boston to Salem on the map. He wants to know how many actual miles the inches represent. What feature of the map should he look for?
A hammer and a screwdriver are next to each other in the sunlight. After one hour, the hammer is hotter than the screwdriver. The shape and mass of each object may affect the amount of heat each object gains. Another explanation for the difference in temperature may be that the hammer and screwdriver are
On January 15th, there were 10 hours and 24 minutes of daylight in Jacksonville, Florida. On the same day, there were only 9 hours and 37 minutes of daylight in New York City. Why did New York have fewer hours of daylight than Florida?
A euglena has a flagellum and a paramecium has cilia. Both types of organelles help these organisms move through the water. However, a paramecium can also use its cilia to perform another task. What is this task?
Which characteristic of wolves is most likely learned?
Which would most help pollinators find flowers that are pollinated at night?
A solar eclipse occurs when
Which process turns a large rock into a pile of smaller stones?
Where are the active volcanoes most likely to be found?
During its lifetime, a star will evolve through several stages. In which stage does a star spend most of its life?
Which of the following elements is best able to combine with itself and hydrogen [H] to form large molecules?
Which of the following is designed to transform an electromagnetic wave into a mechanical wave?
Four students tried to find out which magnet was the strongest. They each shared one idea. Which idea shows scientific thinking?
Energy is transferred in an electrical circuit through
The life cycle of a star includes formation, life, and death. In the Universe, where do new stars originate?
What would be the initial result if a DNA molecule did not replicate accurately?
Photosynthesis and respiration are both parts of which cycle?
Earth is tilted as it travels around the Sun. The tilt changes the amount of energy each area gets from the Sun, which makes some months of the year warmer than others. What are the four main temperature changes in a year called?
If your hands are cold, you can warm them by rubbing them together. The heat energy that you produce is caused by
Large amounts of industrial gases are released into the atmosphere every day. What happens to those gases?
In which way is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell?
What is a primary role of decomposers in an ecosystem?
What chemical symbol represents the element copper?
Meteorologists study weather. Which of the following should meteorologists know about?
The crews of two boats at sea can communicate with each other by shouting. Why is it impossible for the crews of two spaceships a similar distance apart in space to do this?
Which liquid most likely contains a dissolved gas?
Silica sand is a resource used in large volume in Nevada. This resource is used to make which product?
Which of these best describes the function of the skeletal system?
A student wants to find out how many different kinds of birds are found in a park. In addition to a bird identification book, the student should use ___.
Nevada mines produce greater quantities of a particular resource than any other state. What resource is produced from these mines?
A student throws a ball. Which of these best describes the moving ball?
During which process does genetic material come from two parents?
Which of these is a threat to the survival of an ecosystem?
Which human organ system produces most of the hormones that regulate body functions?
The complex, three-dimensional structure of a protein is sensitive to heat because the structure is maintained by
A few types of birds live in the same ecosystem. Which of these characteristics would most likely affect how they compete with each other for food?
Most of the United States is a part of which tectonic plate?
At one time, scientists believed that living organisms came from nonliving objects. This theory was revised through
The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. What is the primary function of the excretory system?
Which is the best tool for measuring the temperature of lake water?
The teeth of a carnivore are MOSTLY -
Panels of solar cells are used to collect energy from the Sun and convert it into energy for use in homes. Into what type of energy is the solar energy converted?
A student wants to estimate the number of dandelion plants growing in a field. He counts the number of plants in a 5 square meter section of the field. What other information should he obtain to make his estimate?
Overuse of which water resource tends to cause land to subside?
Students are preparing to determine the boiling points of several aqueous solutions. In addition to proper lab attire, what devices or instruments will the students need to conduct this experiment?
One solar day on Jupiter lasts only 9 hours and 50 minutes. What causes a solar day?
The finest-grained soils are richest in
Wind and water are examples of renewable energy sources because
Gregor Mendel contributed to the study of biology by the careful, objective study of
Which statement describes the most likely effect of transformation on bacteria such as E. coli?
A metal pan will heat up quickly when placed over a gas or electric burner. The metal pan is a good
Which is a fact rather than an opinion about earthquakes?
Which statement best describes the development of a human embryo?
Which of these natural disasters is least likely to cause major damage to a prairie ecosystem?
The life cycle of a beetle is similar to the butterfly. Which process changes the beetle from larva to adult?
Which adaptation helps a bird fly?
Scientists are able to correlate time and the amount of difference between homologous genes when studying the divergence of two species because scientists have reliable estimates for which value?
Which of the following is a part of the process of sexual reproduction?
Why are diseases transmitted through the bites of infected animals not considered contagious diseases?
Scientists theorize that the original atmosphere of Earth was stripped away by the solar wind shortly after the formation of the planet. The Jovian planets are far enough from the Sun that the solar wind has less of an impact. Studies of the Jovian planets suggest the early atmosphere of Earth was mainly composed of which two gases?
Which human body systems work directly together to allow locomotion?
Which is the best evidence for the theory of continental drift?
Students go on a field trip to observe salmon spawning in a river. For safety reasons, the students should not
Which of the following involves a learned behavior?
Which of the following colors of visible light has the longest wavelength?
Which is an example of a form of electrical energy?
Which of the following lists units of length from smallest to largest?
Each layer of Earth has different properties. Which statement best describes the mantle of Earth?
Which of these is the best example of sexual reproduction?
Which of these events during a storm at sea can add oxygen from the atmosphere to ocean water?
Which layer of Earth is the thinnest?
Based on the Periodic Table of the Elements, which of these elements has properties most similar to calcium (Ca)?
As a river enters a larger body of water, sediments are deposited over a wide area. Which of these landforms is likely to be formed at the site of deposition?
Which of these is a chemical property of a material?
About how long is a lunar cycle?
Of the following types of cells, which has the highest concentration of mitochondria?
What helps skin feel heat and pressure?
Erosion and weathering can both cause changes to the surface of Earth. Which of the following happens only because of erosion and NOT because of weathering?
Which is an advantage of sexual reproduction in the survival of a population?
A species of moth in England has both a light-colored form and a dark-colored form. In the mid-1800s, the percentage of dark-colored moths increased in areas where black soot from factories covered the trees. The soot in these areas has decreased in more recent times as a result of pollution laws. Which of the following statements describes what has most likely happened to the moth populations in these areas?
Energy appears in many forms. What form of energy is lightning?
People take in and release gases from the air when they breathe. Which exhaled gas is a waste product of respiration?
A unicellular organism is best described as being
Which of the following best describes how plants use the energy they receive from sunlight?
What can be inferred from a food product advertisement that claims "30% less fat than our leading competitors"?
Which material is the best conductor of electricity?
A ball is dropped from the top of a tall building. As the ball falls, the upward force of air resistance becomes equal to the downward pull of gravity. When these two forces become equal in magnitude, the ball will
Which statement describes an interaction between the hydrosphere and the atmosphere?
Often organisms seem similar in their outward appearances. For example, a porpoise and a shark seem closely related, but they are not. Such similarity is the result of
A group of frogs live together near a small pond. The frogs compete with each other most for which resource?
Which process converts organic nitrogen into an inorganic form that can be used by plants?
In animals, female traits are passed down to offspring from
The visible light spectrum can be subdivided according to
Three scientists conducted the same experiment to analyze the effectiveness of a cleaning agent on household bacteria. What is the main advantage of having the experiment repeated?
Today, almost all cars have seat belts. How does improving the design of seat belts help people the most?
Which type of organism is made of one cell?
At camp, Raj sees a lightning storm. He sees the lightning before he hears the thunder. What does this show?
What advantage do the offspring of a dandelion have by reproducing asexually?
Which of the following statements best describes a result of using interchangeable parts to manufacture automobiles?
A stone arch bridge relies primarily on which of the following for its load strength?
After a storm, a hospital may have to rely on backup generators to power some equipment. Which is the energy conversion provided by the generators?
Many flowers attract bees. Bees consume nectar from the flower for energy. How does this interaction benefit the plant?
In living things, traits are passed on from one generation to the next by the transfer of
Every organism in an ecosystem receives energy from another source. Which of these organisms receives its energy directly from the Sun?
Aristotle taught that a force was always required to keep an object moving. Which of the following states what Newton believed?
The solar system containing Earth consists of a sun and planets. Which statement best describes the motion of the planets in our solar system?
Animal wastes contain bacteria that make organisms sick. These wastes are often washed into water supplies by storms. How might a pet owner prevent these bacteria from polluting water supplies?
Which of the following is performed by the quality control division of a company that is manufacturing a chair?
Which type of storm causes the most flooding in areas located near an ocean coastline?
Anne and her father find a 30-million year-old tropical plant fossil in Louisiana. Which question does the fossil help them answer?
In the Four Corners area in the US Southwest, there are large rocky outcroppings of basalt. These were formed by ancient lava flows. Using this information, what class of rock is this?
The heath hen, an extinct small wild fowl, was a relative of the prairie chicken. Which of the following most likely caused extinction of the heath hen?
A stationary air mass over the Gulf of Mexico would typically be
Which of the following metals will be attracted to a magnet?
A student wants to create a drawing of the water cycle. Which image can the student use to represent water cycling through the atmosphere?
Which is made with the help of bacteria?
Lamar learned that birds, mammals, and reptiles are all vertebrates. Which characteristic do all vertebrates share?
Which of these is most likely to create large areas of land subsidence?
Which of the following best describes two atoms of oxygen that are chemically bonded to each other?
If the climate in an area were to become much drier, which plant variation would be most advantageous to the survival of the species?
Which form of energy is in firewood?
What covers most of the Earth's surface?
Which tool is best used to observe a soil sample?
A student walks along a trail by a lake on a cool summer morning. Which statement is an observation the student could make?
Eating food that is undercooked can lead to a disease that affects the digestive system. Which body part is directly affected by the disease?
Which property supports the hypothesis that eukaryotic mitochondria were once prokaryotic organisms?
Metals that easily transfer electricity are called
Animals and plants need oxygen to live. Oxygen is released in photosynthesis. Which cycle includes photosynthesis?
The Statue of Liberty was built in France and then taken apart into 350 pieces for shipping. When the pieces arrived in New York, the statue was put together. Which statement describes the relationship between the mass of the 350 pieces and the mass of the whole statue?
Which statement describes the weather when water droplets in clouds become heavy and the temperature is 20°C (68°F)?
Scientists use different tools during their investigations. What tool does a scientist use to study cells?
Snowy owls live in very cold areas. Which adaptation is most likely a result of living in this type of environment?
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_{3}) will neutralize stomach acid (HCl) in a double replacement reaction as follows: NaHCO_{3} + HCl -> NaCl + CO_{2} + \Box What is the product necessary to make this reaction complete?
Heat transfer by conduction occurs when molecules
The color of an object such as an apple is the same as the color the light waves
What causes the tectonic plates of Earth to continually move?
Which is the correct order in the process of sedimentary rock formation?
The discovery of tectonic plates and the cause of their movement is best described as a result of which scientific procedure?
Cancer is most often the result of
All organisms need food to survive. Which statement best describes the purpose of food for organisms?
Soil is important to a forest because the soil ___.
How do muscles and bones work together to create body movement?
Biologists moved a predator from sea level to a higher altitude, where they noticed that the predator became tired more quickly. If this predator had to live at a higher altitude, which adaptation would be necessary for it to survive?
Ernie made a diagram to model Earth's orbit. What shape is most like what Ernie drew for the orbit?
Classification of galaxies is based on which characteristic?
Which physical characteristic of a puppy is most likely inherited from its parents?
A scientist crosses two different varieties of corn to produce a single variety that has traits from both parents. This technique is an example of
A class measures the time it takes for two different trucks to drive across the parking lot. How can they tell which truck is faster?
The fossils of dinosaurs that lived millions of years ago can be found in
Which of the following contains salt water?
During digestion, fructose is produced by the breakdown of larger molecules. Which type of molecule could be broken down to increase the body's fructose levels?
Which is the most important reason for scientists to publish their data and findings that result from a scientific investigation?
Which reflects light?
Which of the following is a necessary condition for a lunar eclipse to occur?
The excessive use of nitrogen-based fertilizers causes runoff that increases the nitrogen content of lakes and bays. These nitrogen compounds directly affect the aquatic ecosystems by
A blacksmith bends a metal rod into a round wheel. Which statement best describes the wheel?
Which moon phase occurs approximately 14 days after a full moon?
After a person eats, the food is converted into energy by
Which statement best describes the primary role of perspiration in humans?
A person produces two sound waves with a flute, one immediately after the other. Both sound waves have the same pitch, but the second one is louder. Which of the following properties is greater for the second sound wave?
Why is the light year often used to describe distances between objects in the universe?
Which organisms break down dead matter and recycle nutrients back into the ecosystem?
A student viewing a cell with a microscope observes a cell wall, a cell membrane, and a nucleus. The presence of these structures indicates that the student is looking at a cell from a
Which action results in a chemical change?
What has occurred when bubbles form in a liquid that is being heated?
The breakfast that a student ate provided energy for bicycling later in the day. Which energy transformation most likely occurred?
In an experiment, water and salt are mixed together. What is the best way to separate the salt from the water?
A metal spoon and a wooden spoon are used to stir a pot of hot soup. After a few minutes, the metal spoon feels hotter than the wooden spoon. What explains this?
Materials made of the same substance will have characteristics in common. Which property is most likely to remain constant in different samples of the same material?
Which is Earth's largest source of drinkable water?
Some classrooms have computers. The computer is most useful to the students because it helps them
Which of these is an example of something being recycled?
Which of the following is an example of a compound?
One rabbit runs faster than other rabbits in its population. How will the ability to run fast most likely benefit the rabbit?
What is the BEST reason for including fruits and leafy vegetables in a healthy diet?
In one day, a family in a car rode for 2 hours, stopped for 3 hours, and then rode for another 5 hours. During the day, the family traveled a total distance of 400 kilometers. What was their average speed for the whole trip?
A Raleigh man turned on his kitchen faucet and filled a glass with water. When he looked at the water, he thought that it might not be safe to drink, so he called the water company to find out. What factor did the man use to evaluate the safety of the water?
Which of these is the main source of the electromagnetic energy we use?
Which of the following is the starting point for a new scientific investigation?
All organisms depend on the transfer of energy to survive. Which best shows the energy transfer between animals in a shoreline ecosystem?
Which investigation might be used to demonstrate potential energy?
The fossil record shows that trees have changed throughout the years. Which of the following conclusions would be best supported by the fossil record?
An agriculturalist predicts that the tomato harvest will be very good this year. Which has the greatest effect on the size of the tomato harvest?
A student investigates the effect of temperature on the distance a caterpillar travels in one minute. The student performs the investigation at four different times of day using one caterpillar. This experiment could be improved if the student
A bright object with a long tail of glowing gases is in orbit around the Sun. This object is most likely
A hearing aid is a small device that contains an amplifier, a battery, a microphone, and a speaker. Which part of a hearing aid functions to detect sounds in the user's environment?
In an experiment studying phototropism, students grew bean plants in labeled cardboard milk cartons. Afterward, the plants and soil were properly discarded. Which instruction line BEST conserves the remaining resources?
How are electromagnetic waves different from other waves?
The Sun releases light and heat energy that cause changes on Earth. How does the Sun's energy change water?
In the 18th century, smallpox was a common and deadly disease. A country doctor, Edward Jenner, observed that patients working with cattle who contracted a mild disease called cowpox, never came down with the more serious smallpox. When Jenner obtained liquid from cowpox sores and injected it into healthy patients, they became immune to smallpox. What term best describes Jenner's treatment for smallpox?
What is the name of a circuit in which the current splits at the junctions?
A coach is standing at the finish line of a race. He is holding a stopwatch. What is the coach most likely measuring with the stopwatch?
A growing community relies on a nearby lake to provide fresh water for drinking and bathing. An increase in the use of fresh water will cause the lake to become
Which of these senses lets Dora know when a skunk has been close to her house?
In 2001, NASA launched a probe to investigate very low-energy radiation emitted when the universe began. What part of the electromagnetic spectrum does this probe observe and record?
What electrical charge does a proton have in an atom?
Work is a product of force and distance. Which of the following is an example of work?
All of the different organisms interacting in a pond make up
If a lake is polluted, which organisms would most likely accumulate the highest concentration of contaminants?
Sand is a type of soil that is made of very tiny pieces of material. Which process most likely forms sand?
What is needed to change ice into water?
Stars form from nebulae of dust and gases. Depending on its properties, a star may become a red, yellow, white, or blue star. Which property determines this star type?
Which of these is MOST likely made from only one material?
Francis plugged a toaster into an electric outlet. He put a piece of bread in the toaster and turned the toaster on. While the toaster was on, it changed the electrical energy from the outlet into other forms of energy. Which form of energy toasted the bread?
A student measured liquid with a graduated cylinder. Which of the following units could be used to record the volume of the liquid?
Which term is an example of a life process?
A student divides several cubes into two groups, based on whether or not each cube can float in later. What property is the student using to classify the cubes?
Use The Periodic Table of the Elements and the information below to answer the question. Magnesium metal (Mg) is grayish-white in color and reacts actively with water. Fluorine (F2) is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature and is a member of the halogen family. These two elements react to produce magnesium fluoride (MgF2), a chemical commonly used in making windows and lenses. According to the Periodic Table of the Elements, which element is most similar to magnesium (Mg)?
How do word processors on computers benefit most students?
Students observed that a diamond was able to scratch a piece of talc. What does this observation best support?
Which was a main force driving extensive speciation when the environment became hospitable to life after the Permian mass extinction?
Some types of bacteria can only live where oxygen is not present. These bacteria were well adapted to life on Earth over 2 billion years ago. Which of the following changes caused many of these bacteria to become extinct?
Which two are functions of flowers?
When soil becomes saturated during rainfall, excess water begins to collect on the surface. Downslope movement of this excess water to rivers, lakes, and streams is called
What type of energy is transmitted from the Sun to Earth through space?
What is the cause of rising surface temperatures of the Pacific Ocean, drought in the western United States, and flooding on the Pacific coast of South America?
Use of nuclear fuel would most likely reduce human contributions to which environmental problem?
What unit of measure should Jerry use to report the volume of a liquid?
Use the information below to answer the question. Manufacturing uses many steps to change natural resources into products. Some of these steps change natural resources into industrial materials. These steps are called primary processes. All of the following are primary processes except
What part of a communication system converts binary codes in a computer into recognizable characters?
Which geologic process occurs when the acid in precipitation dissolves certain types of rock?
Water evaporates mostly from
Robin compared the properties of some rocks. Which property did she most likely compare with a balance?
Because copper is a metal, it is
What process makes it possible for the nutrients from organic material to be added to soil?
Why is it not a safe practice to place a fuel depot over an aquifer?
Look at the equation. 2H_{2} + O_{2} -> 2H_{2}O What does the equation show?
Which statement best describes the Law of Superposition?
Which object is the best conductor of electricity?
Green plants get the energy they need to make food from
Which property of a mineral is most likely being tested when it is scratched with a nail?
Ricardo has an igneous rock in his rock collection. Where did this rock most likely form?
Animals get energy from eating food that comes from plants. Plants survive by taking in substances that are released by animals. What substance do animals release that plants take in?
Which factor determines whether precipitation will be in the form of rain or snow?
Which of these materials transfers heat energy quickest?
Electrical wires are coated with a rubber or plastic because these materials are good
An increase in which ecosystem factor could cause a population decline in a bird species?
Twentieth-century research and development of vaccines significantly reduced the threat of
The tendency of an element to react chemically is closely related to
Modern submarines have advanced atmosphere-control systems that enable submarine crews to stay below the surface of the ocean for months at a time. Which of the following also benefits from this technology?
Which pieces of equipment would be used to measure the density of a solution?
Gasoline is a nonrenewable energy resource used in most cars and trucks. Gasoline is made from which source?
The average temperature of Earth's surface has increased approximately 1°C in the past century. Which of the following can best explain this increase in temperature?
The Sun is the largest body in the solar system. The Sun is a ___.
Which activity is a good health habit?
The fur of the snowshoe rabbit changes to a lighter color in the winter. This allows the rabbit to blend in with its surroundings. This change is an example of
What does a plant need to make sugar through photosynthesis?
Some birds fly south in the fall and return in the spring. This is an example of
Which of the following is the best conductor of heat?
Some processes that shape Earth's surface are slow. Other processes are rapid. Which statement describes a rapid change?
Which characteristic best identifies a pure substance?
Structures in the universe are grouped into large systems, each of which are made up of smaller systems. Which of the following is the largest system of which Earth is only a very small part?
Which atomic structure has the greatest mass?
When European settlers first came to North America, the average thickness of the top layer of soil was approximately 23 cm. Today, the average thickness of the top layer of soil is less than 15 cm. Which of the following factors has most likely had the greatest effect on erosion of the top layer of soil?
Which of the following is closest to the percentage of the total water on earth that is freshwater?
Most scientists agree that an increase in the amount of greenhouse gases entering Earth's atmosphere causes
Scientists determined that cabbages grown using Fertilizer A grew bigger than cabbages grown using Fertilizer B or no fertilizer at all. The scientists repeated the investigation and produced the same results. Which best explains the purpose of repeating this investigation?
When a small group of organisms colonizes a new habitat, the population may be genetically different from the parent population due to differences in allele frequencies. The process responsible for this is
When conducting a scientific experiment in the field, you are expected to
Which two behaviors best demonstrate stewardship?
Beakers and graduated cylinders are designed to measure
Iron oxides, such as rust, form when iron metal reacts with oxygen in the air. What are the chemical symbols for the two elements found in iron oxide?
Scientists often use mathematical models and computer simulations to study systems. What is the main advantage of using these techniques for studying the spread of infectious diseases?
Which of these actions causes wind?
A company wants to make a game that uses a magnet that sticks to a board. Which material should it use for the board?
Which sequence has the states of matter listed from least to greatest kinetic energy?
A student is given a mixture of gravel and sand and instructed to separate them. Which tool should the student use to best complete this task?
A container is filled with 100 mL of water and placed in a freezer. The water in the container freezes at 0°C. A second container filled with 90 mL of water is placed in a second freezer. At what temperature does this second container of water freeze?
What gas in the air do we need to breathe in order to live?
A city is experiencing heavy smog formed by motor vehicle exhaust. Which of these weather conditions contributes most to the formation of smog?
Ocean currents, like the Gulf Stream, affect world climate by
Jagged mountains would most likely become rounded hills through which process?
While performing an experiment involving four different clear liquids, a student forgets to label the test tubes. What should the student do?
During the light reactions of photosynthesis, energy is stored in the compounds ATP and NADPH. A second set of reactions uses this stored energy to produce vital compounds such as glucose. This second set of reactions involves a biochemical pathway called
What is the relationship between an ecosystem and a community?
Two species of garter snake in the genus Thamnophis originated from a single ancestor. These two species live in the same geographic area, however, one lives in arid land and the other lives in water.Which of the following best identifies the cause of speciation between these two garter snakes?
A metal spoon, a wooden spoon, and a plastic spoon are placed in hot water. After 15 seconds, which spoon will feel hottest?
The bacterium Brucella abortus causes fever in humans. Biologists studying this bacterium found that when exposed to light, the bacterium becomes more virulent. How can this change in virulence most likely be described?
When iron combines with oxygen in a moist environment, rust forms because of a
A student counts ants in an ant colony every day at the same time. The student writes the date of observation in one column in a notebook and the number of ants counted on each date in a second column. Which best describes how the student arranged the information?
Which human body systems work together to send messages?
In order for a material to be effective for cooking, it must have which physical property?
Which sequence shows the life cycle of some insects?
A scientist studied a species of fish. She found that when a certain nutrient was added to the diet of the fish just after hatching, the fish gained an average of 3 kilograms in the first year. What additional information is needed to determine whether the nutrient is affecting the growth of the fish?
Humans interpret seeing, hearing, tasting, and smelling in the
Dan knows the Earth is tilted 23.5° on its axis. Which is caused because of this tilt?
Gel electrophoresis is a technology which allows researchers to reliably separate and sort DNA fragments. This technology is most useful for which application?
Some sea grasses grow near a group of palm trees on a sandy shore. Which best describes the role of both the palm trees and sea grasses?
Students collect pond water in their beakers. Which is the best unit of measurement for the volume of water they collect?
When tectonic plates move, they can form different landforms. Which is least likely to be associated with the tectonic plate movement that forms volcanoes?
The thin layer of rock on Earth's surface is the
Which type of radiation provides astronomers with the most useful information about high-energy events such as stars colliding?
All of the following are renewable resources except
What is the most important property architects must consider when selecting materials for the walls, ceilings, and floors for a new concert hall?
Eduardo saw some cats living in an alley. Which of these does a cat need to survive?
A puddle of water on a concrete driveway will disappear after a few hours during a sunny day. Where does the water go as it disappears?
Science students investigated the cause of the different phases of the moon. The model that would best demonstrate the cause of the phases of the moon would include representations of
Electrical energy is best described as
A car and a truck are traveling at the same rate of speed. The vehicles approach a stop sign. Which statement best explains why the car stops in a shorter distance than the truck?
After a rain, a puddle of water remains on a sidewalk. After a day of sunshine, the puddle is gone. Which process is most responsible for the disappearance of the puddle?
After which event will primary succession most likely occur?
An object moves through space with balanced forces acting on it. Which statement best describes the speed and direction of the object as long as the forces acting on it remain balanced?
About how long does it take Earth to make a complete revolution around the Sun?
Scientists found trilobite and brachiopod index fossils in cliffs a great distance apart from each other. What can scientists infer about the rocks in which these fossils were found?
Which of the following is a function of the digestive system of the human body?
A person must lift a heavy load of bricks to the top of a building. Which simple machine is best used for this task?
Which form of energy is required for a television set to work?
The water cycle is important for recycling the water on Earth. Which of these is the source of most of the water vapor in Earth's atmosphere?
The molecule ATP is composed of elements commonly found in organic molecules. Which of the following is one of these elements?
Which energy transformation occurs when a person hits a drum with a drumstick?
Which best describes the energy conversion by a household toaster?
In late fall, a rabbit's fur grows thicker. This adaptation occurs to
Many birds avoid eating the viceroy butterfly because it looks like the monarch butterfly. Monarch butterflies contain a substance that makes the birds sick when monarchs are eaten. The development of the pattern of the viceroy butterfly to look like the monarch butterfly is an example of
Which difference between water and ice results in ice floating on cold water?
When buying a sunscreen, which is the best question to keep in mind while reading the label for maximum effectiveness?
Which of the following is a description of an organism's development?
Soil that drains slowly most likely has a high amount of
Bile salts play a crucial role in gastrointestinal homeostasis and digestion. Which phrase is the best description of the gastrointestinal function of bile salts?
Which type of energy is transferred by vibrational waves?
The process of gene regulation directly impacts
What is the most important thing a cylinder, a measuring cup, and a beaker all have in common?
Scientists have shown that clearing the forest in the Amazon for farming is causing the extinction of native species. Which is the most direct cause of extinction from clear-cutting of land?
James read that plants benefit animals by changing the atmosphere. How do plants most likely change the atmosphere in a way that is beneficial for animals?
What model is used to show the pattern of traits that are passed from one generation to the next in a family?
Tiny droplets of water seen floating in the air can give scientists a clue about the weather. What are groups of these droplets called?
When taken to a new habitat, non-native plants often threaten native plants of the new habitat. Why do non-native plants threaten native plants?
Which technology enables doctors to monitor the function of the heart?
Which substance contributes most to the greenhouse effect?
A large amount of oil was spilled in a lake environment. Within a few weeks, the number of plants and animals living in the area where the oil was spilled will most likely
Which explains the relationship between hours of sunlight and seasons?
The temperature of the stratosphere increases with altitude because of the presence of
Which structure refers to a group of specialized cells that all perform the same function?
Which event occurs only twice each year?
What would be the phenotype of a cross between a homozygous dominant tall plant and a homozygous recessive short plant?
Joey is making breakfast and pours a glass of milk over a bowl of dry cereal. Which best describes what Joey made for breakfast?
Scientists determined that specific agents produce specific diseases, and many are transmitted by sneezing. What must the droplets contain for a disease to be transmitted by sneezing?
Which of the following organisms would most likely get its food energy only from consumers?
Coal is a fossil fuel that is formed from
What do birds, bats and butterflies have in common?
Changes at the molecular level can turn proto-oncogenes into oncogenes. These changes cause unregulated cell division. Which disease is caused by this transformation?
Which characteristic of sound makes it possible for bats to fly in the dark without hitting any objects?
Students went on a class field trip to Natural Bridge Caverns. They noticed rock formations in the cave called stalactites. Which of these processes caused the stalactites to form?
A switch that can open or close an electric circuit can be used to
Jesus learned that a space probe named Voyager 1 was launched from Earth in 1977. It will take Voyager 1 more than 500 years to travel 1 light year. What is a light year used to measure in space?
Scientists think that the rise in global temperature during the last one hundred years is due to an increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Which question would best help scientists assess the claim that humans are responsible for the rising global temperature?
Which structure controls what enters both plant cells and animal cells?
Appearance, texture, and density are classified as
A student compares a plant cell to an animal cell. Which structure will the student find ONLY in the plant cell?
One hot summer, a grassland experienced a drought. Which most likely happened in the ecosystem during this time?
The need for farmland in Brazil has led to the cutting of the rain forests in the Amazon. Cutting trees in the Amazon rain forest might have a global effect by
Which two body systems maintain the level of glucose in the blood?
A student writes in a laboratory notebook: I placed a piece of iron in a beaker of water and the iron sank to the bottom of the beaker. What the student wrote in the laboratory notebook is an example of a(n)
Which series correctly represents the levels of organization in an organism?
Which is a function of a seed?
Which process below uses carbon dioxide and the sun's radiant energy to produce chemical energy?
A serotinous cone is a seed enclosure that requires intense heat to open. When would a population of trees most benefit from having serotinous cones?
A lumber company plants new trees where a forest once stood. This is an example of
Some pea plants always have peas with smooth skin. Other pea plants always have peas with wrinkled skin. How can a student best predict which kind of pea will grow from a seed that is planted?
How do plants affect their environment?
Which is an example of a physical property of an object?
What happens when a warm object is put inside a cooler object?
Newborn white-tailed deer have hundreds of spots on their coats which gradually disappear at three to four months of age. The spots on their coats make the newborns blend in with the environment through
What is the smallest particle of an element that still exhibits all the properties of that element?
A population of tree-climbing lizard lives on one bank of a large river. The other bank of the river is a treeless prairie. During a flood, 40 lizards were transferred to the prairie side of the river. After 200 generations, this transferred population of lizard lost the ability to climb.Which mechanism is most likely responsible for this loss of function within the transferred population?
When a cup of water at room temperature is put in a freezer, the water's state of matter will change from
The weight of an object can change because of the force that acts on that object. Which force causes the weight of an object to change?
Use the information below to answer the question. The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. What is the primary function of the excretory system?
What is the MAJOR cause of acid rain?
In 1921, Earl Dickson invented a bandage after he noticed his wife was unable to easily cover cuts on her hands. He covered the bandage with a chemical that sealed it so air would not enter the cut. How did solving this problem benefit others medically?
Which is a factor that most likely would affect the climate in a particular area?
Pond ecosystems depend on the water cycle to ensure the survival of the animals that live in or near the pond. If a drought reduces the water level, which population of animals would be most affected?
Some plants rely on hummingbirds for pollination. If a deadly disease infected the hummingbird population, what would most likely happen to the plants?
When salt is added to ice, the ice begins to melt because the salt
Leaf cells are one type of tree cell. Which process occurs in a growing leaf cell?
Which diagram correctly shows the flow of energy in a food chain?
Which form of energy is produced when paper is burned?
A group of cells performing the same function in the body is called
Which material is a good conductor of heat?
All living organisms have certain needs in order to stay alive. Which is most necessary for both plants and animals?
Plant leaves have tiny pores. These pores help plants release water from their tissues into the
How can washing your hands help keep you from getting sick?
Which part of a plant makes sugar from carbon dioxide?
One method of heat distribution is a baseboard forced hot water system. A baseboard system carries hot water through a pipe that passes through many small, flat plates called fins. What is the purpose of these fins?
Aerogels are compounds formed by the drying of certain gels. Although the aerogel hardens into a solid material, the particles in the gel are much farther apart than those of most solids and particles are held together by strong bridges of covalently bonded atoms. Which of the following is a likely property of aerogels?
What renewable energy source used to make electricity is thought to be always available?
When heat flows from a hot spot to a cooler spot, entropy increases. When heat is forced to flow from a cool spot to a warmer spot, entropy decreases. Marta is looking for something in her house that causes a decrease in entropy. Which of these should she choose?
Which of the following is influenced by both genetics and behavior?
Which of the following natural disasters is likely to cause the most widespread damage in a coastal ecosystem?
One function of the circulatory system is to carry cellular nutrients to the body. Which part of the circulatory system is responsible for exchanging nutrients and wastes?
How does sedimentary rock form?
Which of the following best explains why electrical wires are usually covered with plastic or rubber?
The Moon revolves around Earth about once every
Calcium is a mineral that helps make your bones and teeth strong. Which of these foods is the best source of calcium?
According to the endosymbiotic theory, the outer membrane of the chloroplast originated from which organelle?
Students performing a scientific investigation are most likely trying to
Which statement describes a function of bones in mammals such as dogs and horses?
To a person standing motionless on the Earth's surface on a day with no wind, in which direction would the rain appear to fall?
Which two things interact most in the water cycle?
Some animals have advantages and disadvantages because they are different. Which of the following has a disadvantage compared to other animals in its population?
Which is a characteristic of both plants and animals?
What is the main difference between planets and moons in our solar system?
Which is a response of the autonomic nervous system that helps maintain equilibrium in the body?
Maria Mitchell discovered a comet in 1847 that was later named after her. Maria Mitchell's discovery contributed to which branch of science?
When a lightbulb is lit, electrical energy is changed into light energy and
Water moves directly from a lake to the air by which of the following processes?
In the late 1700s, Antoine Lavoisier performed a series of experiments to find out what happened when a substance burned. In each experiment, he observed that the weight of a container and its contents was the same at the end of the experiment as it had been in the beginning. These observations led him to propose the law of
A student has a mineral sample. He wonders if the sample is the mineral mica. He knows the cleavage pattern of mica is a smooth, flat sheet. The student can best find out the cleavage pattern of the sample by
A full Moon is observed in Buffalo, New York, on June 1. Approximately when will the next full Moon be observed in Buffalo?
A computer model of an insect population takes into account the following parameters: * available food resources * annual temperature variation * timing of insect reproductive cycles Which additional parameter would most significantly improve the model's accuracy when predicting the insect population size?
Many insects go through metamorphosis. Which series shows the stages of complete metamorphosis correctly?
Which of these describes rotation?
Sam looks into a fish pond and points at a goldfish. Sam's grandfather looks where Sam is pointing and tells Sam that the fish is actually in a different location. Which property of light explains why Sam's grandfather is correct?
People sitting around a campfire are able to feel the heat from the fire. How are the people able to feel the heat from the fire without touching the fire?
In which case does a physical change occur?
Which energy source could involve a dam?
Which cellular structure do organisms in the kingdoms Eubacteria, Archaebacteria, and Protista have in common?
Sheri went on a field trip with her class and saw a stream with floating garbage. How could this pollution affect humans?
Which information would probably be most helpful to someone trying to identify a mineral sample?
Which of these is most likely an effect of releasing carbon dioxide pollution into the atmosphere?
Plastic conducts very little thermal energy or electricity. Because of this property, plastic would most likely be used to cover
Which unit of measurement do astronomers use when measuring the distance between two stars found in the Milky Way?
The human body is made up of several systems. The mouth, esophagus, and stomach are all parts of which system?
Which term describes the path the Moon travels around Earth?
Which best describes an exothermic reaction?
During freezing, melting, and boiling, water changes from one state to another state. Heat needs to be supplied for which of these to take place?
Which of the following is a first-level consumer?
A force of 5 N is required to increase the speed of a box from a rate of 1.0 m/s to 3.0 m/s within 5 s along a level surface. What change would most likely require additional force to produce the same results?
What is the MAJOR reason Earth has seasons?
In a particular habitat, Animal X has two sources of food. One source is found in the water and the other source is found on land. If the main predator of Animal X is found only on land, what is the most likely structural adaptation that will be selected for in the population of Animal X?
A teacher uses an instrument that records decibel levels. What is the teacher measuring?
Which best explains how nutrients get into soil?
Lichens grow on rocks and produce an acid that reacts with part of the rock, forming soil. Which best describes the action of lichens on the rocks?
Why do the Sun and Moon appear to move across the sky?
Which human activity would have the greatest positive impact on the water quality of a stream?
A student pours water into a cup and places the cup in a freezer. After many hours, the water will change from
Which gas is given off by a plant during photosynthesis?
Which of the following processes makes it possible for plants to use energy from sunlight to produce their own food?
Which protist has starch granules in its cytoplasm?
Which resource is more available due to improvements in deep-sea drilling technology?
Tooth decay is an infection that causes deterioration of the protective enamel on teeth, resulting in damage. Tooth decay is most likely caused by
Which structure do a rabbit cell and a bacillus cell have in common?
Which of these is necessary for life on Earth?
During a collision, a seat belt slows the speed of a crash dummy. What is the direction of the net force exerted by the seat belt compared to the direction of the crash dummy's motion?
By inserting a gene into crop plants, scientists have developed plants that are resistant to insects. If an insect eats the plant, the insect dies. Which practice is unnecessary with this new plant variety?
As wood in a campfire burns, it releases heat and becomes ash. What kind of change occurs in the wood when it burns and releases heat?
Which statement is an inference?
Which process moves water from the oceans to the atmosphere?
At concentrations of 0.1-1 µg/ml colchicine, a natural plant product, can cause the mitotic arrest of dividing cells at metaphase through disrupting the spindle apparatus. Colchicine interferes with which of these cell functions during cell division?
Most species of ducks have webbed feet. The webbed feet are an example of
On which date does North America usually experience the longest period of daylight?
What causes an object to fall to the ground when you let it drop from your hand?
The phases of the Moon are caused by the
One system of the human body works along with the skeletal system by assisting movement and maintaining posture. Which system is being described?
The discovery of penicillin helped in the
When the environment changes more quickly than a species can adapt, the species may become
A student hears on the radio that the outside temperature is 32°C. What type of weather will the student most likely expect when she steps outside?
Which parts of an atom are reactive during a chemical process?
What is one way people are helping the environment?
What is the function of hollow bones in birds?
A screwdriver is used to pry the lid off a paint can. The resistance arm is 0.5 centimeters. The effort arm is 20 centimeters. What is the mechanical advantage of the screwdriver?
Food provides calories needed by the body for energy. However, the body must use energy between meals when food is not consumed. What is the most likely response of the body when more energy is used than the calories consumed provide?
The climate of an area would be expected to have the least fluctuations in temperatures where the
Why would animals most likely have to leave an area during a drought?
Secondary pollutants are produced in the environment by chemical reactions involving primary or emitted chemicals. Which of the following is a secondary pollutant?
The human brain is an organ that is made up of many tissues. This information can be used to determine that the brain is
A bicyclist rides on a flat road and then stops pedaling but does not apply the brakes. The bicycle stops because of ___.
One student rubs a balloon against his hair several times. Another student passes a comb through her hair several times. The students place the comb near the balloon and observe that the comb repels the balloon. Which is the most likely reason the comb is able to repel the balloon?
How is weather related to climate?
Katie has a mixture of iron filings and sand. She wants to separate them. How can she do this?
Which process is common to most living things?
The angle of a ramp is changed several times during an experiment. Which tool is needed to measure the different angles?
All of these are examples of observation and measurement except
The piping plover is a bird that builds its nest on sand dunes along the Atlantic Ocean. Which of these actions most likely damages the nests of the piping plover?
Which is an effect that cities have on the weather?
A "shooting star" is
Which type of organism converts wastes and dead materials into nutrients that can be used by plants?
Biochemical reactions that require high temperatures to proceed are able to take place at body temperature within the cells of living organisms. Which factor is mainly responsible for allowing biochemical reactions to proceed at body temperature?
Which statement best compares gravity on the Moon to gravity on Earth?
An enclosed 20 mL metal cylinder was filled with a gas sample at room temperature. The sample then was transferred to an empty 40 mL enclosed container, also at room temperature. After being transferred, the volume of the gas was
Melting, boiling, and freezing are examples of
There is a shadow under a tree. Which form of energy must be present for the shadow to occur?
Seismometers measure quick changes that happen in the crust of our planet. Which of the following is a seismometer used to measure?
In some lakes, excessive blooms of algae appear when human activity causes degradation of water quality resulting in conditions more favorable for algae growth. Which human activity primarily causes this problem?
Drake has started a garden. What can Drake do to enrich the soil so that his plants will grow better?
Which of these objects will rust?
Which color baseball cap would absorb the most light on a sunny day?
Which body systems are most involved in the response when someone stubs his or her toe?
Which part of a sound wave measures loudness?
Neurons respond to stimuli and transmit impulses to coordinate body functions. Which of these indicates the rapid change in the membrane potential when a neuron is stimulated?
Materials that let electrons flow very easily from one atom to another
Which is the most important safety measure to follow when using an acid in a classroom laboratory?
In a deep valley on Earth, a person shouting will hear an echo as the sound is reflected back off the surrounding mountains. In a similar valley on the Moon, no echo will be heard. This is because
The motion of a car accelerating in a straight line differs from the motion of a car moving in a straight line at a constant speed. Which change best describes acceleration of a car?
During which time of day are the highest temperatures most often recorded?
When butterfly eggs hatch, the young are called ___.
Louis Pasteur's work in the nineteenth century on pasteurization greatly improved
An earthworm was placed on top of a thick layer of moist topsoil in a pan. The pan was placed in a room with the lights on. How did the earthworm most likely respond to these conditions?
What is the liquid layer of Earth that lies beneath the mantle?
Many natural resources are found in Maryland and the surrounding area. Some of these natural resources are renewable and some are nonrenewable. People use both kinds of resources in daily activities. Using natural resources often produces waste products. Burning fossil fuels, such as oil, coal, and gasoline produces pollution. Which type of pollution is most often produced by burning fossil fuels?
When a bird sings, it is most likely singing in order to
Coal is used for generating about 53% of the electrical energy in the United States. Which of these environmental issues is directly contributed to by the burning of coal?
Which term correctly describes all of the following materials? salt water, vinegar, bronze, air, beach sand
Isle Royale is a large island in Lake Superior. During the 1800s, most of the trees were removed, and the wolves and moose that lived on the island died. In the early 1900s, moose were reintroduced to the island. By 1925, the moose population on Isle Royale rose to about 2,000 individuals. Which best explains how the moose population grew so rapidly?
Which is a characteristic Earth and the Moon have in common?
As Bobby entered a dark room, he pushed the switch on the wall to turn on the light. What makes the light turn on when Bobby pushes the switch?
Which human organ system eliminates liquid and gaseous wastes from the body?
When visiting the beach, Felicity observed that a breeze blew in from the ocean during the day and out toward the ocean at night. Which factor is most responsible for the direction of land and sea breezes in coastal regions?
Which pathway do most nutrients take after a person takes a bite of food?
Sound reaches our ears because sound makes air particles
Which event is an example of conduction?
Which type of energy is transferred from one object to another by simple machines?
Which statement best describes how energy transfer within Earth's atmosphere can affect a weather condition?
What is the smallest part of a gold ring that is still gold?
Which tool should a carpenter use to measure the length of a wooden board?
If an ecosystem's balance is disturbed by a volcanic eruption, what will most likely occur?
One example of a trait passed from a parent plant to its offspring is ___.
Many organisms have structures for protection and survival. Which structure is most similar to tree bark?
The human respiratory system is responsible for removing
Humans are protected from some infections by specialized cells which produce chemicals that
Which two forms of energy could best be used to increase the temperature of a sheet of copper?
Which gas is the most abundant in Earth's atmosphere?
Which best explains why stars seen in the night sky are less bright than the Sun?
A scientist observed that the loss of plants near a stream resulted in more soil being washed downstream. How will the excess soil that travels downstream reduce biodiversity?
When Earth's shadow falls on the Moon, the shadow causes a
A class conducts an experiment to determine the best color to paint a solar water heater that they plan to build. For their experimental test, the students have four identical cans. They paint one black, one green, one red, and one white. Each can is filled with 500 mL of 22°C water, and is allowed to sit in the sun for two hours. Which color can will have the greatest increase in water temperature?
Which of these properties of water has the greatest effect on the water cycle?
What causes day and night on Earth?
Which process is an example of a physical change?
The water cycle requires energy. The main source of energy for the water cycle is
Which of these is the fundamental unit of life?
Which would be the most important to consider when selecting material for the walls and ceiling of a concert hall?
When microorganisms deplete the oxygen in soil through respiration, the soil becomes
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is the agency responsible for the space program in the United States. What was the goal of NASA's Apollo program?
A lack of control in the muscular system is most likely related to a problem in what other organ system?
The Russian thistle, commonly known as the tumbleweed, is a big, round plant with many branches and short, stiff leaves. This plant spreads a large number of seeds when it breaks off from its stalk. The thistle is most likely found in what kind of environment?
Scientists find dinosaur fossils in the bottom rock layers of a cliff and mammal fossils in the middle rock layer of the cliff. Which could best be concluded from this evidence?
Joyce put 200 milliliters of water in a beaker, put a thermometer in it, and heated it until it started to boil. She recorded a temperature of 100°C when it started to boil. She repeated the process with 400 milliliters of water. What would be the temperature when the second sample started to boil?
A student wrote the following claim on a homework assignment: "Eukaryotic cells need more lipids than prokaryotic cells." Which statement below provides the BEST support for her claim?
A black bear eats many different things, including grasses, roots, and berries. It also eats insects, fish, and other small animals. Which of these BEST describes a black bear?
A student finds a beaker with a chip in the rim. What should he do with the beaker?
The sum of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom is called the
In which of the following are nutrients directly absorbed from the bloodstream?
Making aluminum cans from recycled materials instead of raw materials is a wise choice because it
What happens to climate and weather over a summer?
A thermometer shows that the outside air temperature is colder than the temperature at which water turns to ice. However, ice on the sidewalk melts. What probably caused this?
Which trait gives owls an advantage when hunting at night?
Wood is considered a renewable resource because
Which event is an example of a chemical change?
Oxygen-rich blood returns from the lungs to the heart. Which two systems are most directly involved in this process?
From simplest to most complicated, how are multicellular organisms organized?
A student wants to find out whether storms with lightning produce more rain than storms without lightning. Which is the best way to answer this question?
How many different elements are in the 20 compound sodium carbonate (Na2CO3)?
In a lab, a bacterial strain shows resistance to an antibiotic. The presence of the antibiotic allows an existing variant within the genetic code to help the bacteria survive. The resistance of bacteria due to an existing genetic variant can be best described as which process?
Which of the following is NOT a mixture?
Which two properties of a crayon will stay about the same after the crayon is melted?
Which human organ system produces hormones to regulate growth, development, and reproduction?
As some organisms die, their remains become buried by mud and are eventually compressed into a type of rock. Which of these is a rock type that forms from this process?
Based on the organization of living things, tissues
Which body system is directly threatened when bacteria infect the lungs?
Where do good bacteria grow to help keep people healthy?
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) causes AIDS. The first known human cases AIDS were in Africa in the late 1950s. Since then, tens of millions of people have died from the disease, and tens of millions more people all over the world are infected. Which term best describes the disease AIDS?
7. What is the cause of most earthquakes?
Which phenomena occur as a result of the gravitational attraction between the moon and Earth?
Which statement best describes how the circulatory system and respiratory system can work together?
Animals depend on plants for many things, including food. What do plants depend on from animals?
Less force is required to launch a spaceship from the surface of the Moon than to launch an identical ship from the surface of Earth because
Two of Earth's plates pushed together, and the ground moved. What happened?
Which of these were formed by glaciers that flowed through the Ruby Mountain region in northeastern Nevada?
A student prepared the following list of characteristics about a cellular organelle. present in animal cells present in plant cells helps make energy available to the cell Which of the following cellular structures is the student describing?
Brian knows deserts get less rain than other ecosystems. However, he also knows that plants can survive in the desert. Which characteristic of a plant most likely helps it live in a desert?
After a volcanic eruption, it takes a long time for large ecosystems to fully recover. Which statement best explains why the development takes so long?
The atomic number of an element refers to the number of
In an ecosystem, not all of the energy that is available is used by the organisms. Some energy becomes unavailable before it can be transferred to organisms in the next trophic level. How does the energy most likely become unavailable?
Which of the following is a direct result of Earth's tilt on its axis?
Tony always drinks water before and after his long bike rides. Why does his body need water when he exercises?
On a field trip in a wooded area, you see a small, strange object. You wonder whether is is a live animal. The best way to find out is to observe the object to see if it
Liquid cooking oil was poured into a container. Which statement best describes a property of the cooking oil after it was poured into the container?
The Sun heats the atmosphere of Earth unevenly. Which of the following is the most likely result of this uneven heating?
A 20-N force acts on a 5-kg object at rest. How fast will the object accelerate on a frictionless surface?
Increasing and revising scientific knowledge of different types of bacteria will most likely enable scientists to develop ways to
What are produced in both the male and female reproductive systems in humans?
The burning of fossil fuels in cities results in high levels of air pollution. Which urban design would best help reduce air pollution?
Which is an inherited trait?
How is xylem similar to phloem in a plant?
In a recycling program, people can separate paper from their other trash. The paper is sent to factories and turned into new products. What does paper recycling help conserve the most?
Water cycles through three states of matter on Earth. What has the greatest effect on the state of matter of water?
Which physical feature exists both on Earth and on the Moon?
Animals and plants are made up of a number of different chemical elements. What happens to all of these elements when animals and plants die?
Students are comparing different rocks. What do all rocks have in common?
What is the most likely result of large-scale agricultural fertilization on aquatic systems?
In order for magma to be converted to igneous rock, which actions must occur?
Trees start as seeds and grow into mature trees that produce more seeds. This pattern represents a
Which sequence identifies the levels of organization of body structures in a human from simplest to most complex?
A cell completes the synthesization of a protein by adding a carbohydrate to the protein's structure. At which site in the cell is the carbohydrate added?
All atoms of an element have in their nuclei the same number of
Henry learned that without the right kind of energy, plants cannot survive. What form of energy is used by plants to perform photosynthesis?
As a corn plant ages, its leaves grow. Which process is directly responsible for the growth of these leaves?
Which scientist is best known for research that led to the modern understanding of the atom?
Which body system typically recognizes, attacks, and destroys foreign cells or substances that may cause disease?
Cell membranes allow some molecules to move freely across the membrane, while other molecules are restricted. Which term best describes this capability of a cell membrane?
Which statement describes the transfer of energy when an ice cube is placed in a cup of hot tea?
Which is the most cooperative relationship between species?
A dog rolls over and receives a treat. The dog rolls over again. This is an example of
Which type of rock is formed when particles are compacted and cemented together?
Tree roots can grow into rock and break it apart. Water can freeze in the cracks of rock, causing it to break apart. How are these two processes alike?
Energy is absorbed and released through endothermic and exothermic processes. Which is an example of an exothermic process?
Where is most fresh (non-salty) water on Earth located?
When a molecule is separated into its component parts, it forms
The universe is believed to be approximately 14 billion years old. As a result of gravitational attraction, which most likely developed first after the Big Bang?
Which is a function of the cardiovascular system?
When a fern reproduces with spores, the offspring
The process of water changing from its liquid state to a gas in the water cycle is known as
In which situation would osmosis most likely occur in cells?
A scientist is watching birds from far away. Which object is the scientist most likely using to watch the birds?
Studies of earthquake waves have helped scientists determine the
Needles on a cactus plant are actually leaves. This needle shape helps the plant survive by
Compost piles have many parts, such as leaves, moisture, vegetables, and microorganisms. Which part of a compost pile breaks down materials and adds nutrients to the soil?
A piece of pine wood floats on the surface of a lake because the water exerts
All living things contain which element?
A student performed an experiment to see how long it would take for a cup of water to freeze. Which information would another student most likely need in order to perform the same experiment?
A student wants to know which type of soil holds the most water. Which action should the student most likely do to answer the question?
Which of these is required to support the theory of star formation?
The frequency of a wave is measured in
Which process causes the fastest changes to the surface of Earth?
Organisms contribute to the water cycle mainly through the process of
Which of these tools is most helpful to a scientist observing very small bacteria?
Apple slices were divided evenly between two identical metal boxes. A lighted 20-watt incandescent light bulb was placed in box A, and a lighted 20-watt fluorescent light was placed in box B. The apple slices in box A dried faster than those in box B because
What season is it in the United States when the South Pole is tilted toward the Sun?
Which of these colors of visible light has the shortest wavelength?
Which of the following units best represents the density of an object?
Which statement below best explains why several fossils of sea organisms were discovered buried deep in an area of dry land?
Last year Steve was shorter than his brother. This year Steve is taller than his brother. What cell process is directly responsible for Steve's growth?
In which state are molecules of a substance arranged in the most orderly way?
Weather stations built in urban areas can be influenced by the human-made structures that surround these stations. Some of these weather stations used to determine mean temperatures in the United States have had the validity of the data questioned. Which human-produced effect could these urban weather stations be measuring?
How is the mass of an atom calculated?
Over a long period, some flowering plants have become dependent on honey bees for pollination. In recent years, a form of mite has infected and killed the honey bees in many areas of the country. Since this has happened, the once bee-dependent plants with the best chance of surviving are those that
Which of these atomic structures has the least amount of mass?
An increase of carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere is most likely to have which effect?
Which of the following is an inherited human trait?
Snow turns to liquid water when it
Which energy source is nonrenewable?
The Moon is in orbit around Earth. What keeps the Moon from changing its orbit?
Which form of water, when present in the atmosphere, is most likely to contribute to global warming?
Which statement explains why ducklings follow their mother when swimming across a pond?
Some students measure the mass of a small pile of leaves before and after the leaves decompose. Each time the students measure the mass, they place a container with the decomposing leaves on a balance. Before recording the mass of the leaves, the students must do which of the following?
Ava conducted an experiment to determine respiratory rates during different activities. She counted the number of breaths per minute. Ava noted that the number of breaths increases as physical activity increases. Why is there an increase in the number of breaths per minute as activity increases?
The temperature in a classroom is 15°C (59°F). The teacher turns the thermostat to 20°C (68°F) and keeps the door closed. Which of the following statements best describes the change that occurs as the temperature in the room increases to 20°C?
A flat piece of paper has a mass of 5 grams. When the paper is crumpled into a ball, the mass of the crumpled paper is
Minerals are used for making many things including jewelry, chalk, and concrete. Where do we get the minerals needed to make these things?
Scientists have observed that, even within the same nest, some young birds call louder than others. Which describes how a louder cry helps to ensure survival?
Two galaxies are interacting with each other. What is the force that draws these two galaxies toward each other?
Which procedure correctly describes materials combining?
Plants growing in a pond release a gas that fish need to survive. Which gas do the plants release that fish use?
A ball rolling on the ground is observed to slow down and stop. Based on Newton's first law of motion, what is the best conclusion?
What is the chemical formula for carbon dioxide?
A student rubs his hands together to warm them. His hands get warm due to
Scientists studying migrating birds and homing pigeons have discovered that they navigate by monitoring differences in the intensity and inclination of Earth's magnetic field. Special cells in bird beaks can detect these changes as the birds fly over Earth's surface. Which metal did the scientists find in the cells that birds use as a magnetometer?
A scientist found a fossil of an organism that had gills. When the organism was living, the area in which it lived was most likely covered by ___.
Which is the best way to help protect the environment?
An electric motor is designed to turn electrical energy into ___.
If a student playing the drums hits the drums with greater force, the sound would be
As the loudness of a sound wave increases, which will also increase?
Telescopes use lenses to observe distant objects such as stars. Which term best describes what happens when lenses bend and concentrate light?
Which of these must occur when a substance goes through a chemical change?
Scientists use ice cores to identify and explain previous climatic trends. By correlating climatic conditions recorded in the ice, with solid, nonsnow particles also found in the ice, scientists can help to predict the climatic impact of which phenomena?
Coal, oil, and natural gas have high potential energies, which makes them valuable energy resources. In order to benefit from the energy available in these fossil fuels, the potential energy is converted most directly into which type of energy?
What change would occur if Earth's rate of rotation significantly increased?
Humans can do many things to impact the environment. Which of these is an example of how humans negatively impact the environment?
Eyeglasses help a nearsighted person see as a result of
A student measures the rising temperature of heated water for 20 minutes in two-minute intervals. Which of these tools will best help the student organize the data?
A rock formation in a land area contains fossils. Over time, tremendous heat and pressure change the formation to produce a harder rock formation without fossils. Which change in rock type has occurred in this land area?
Which is not an inherited trait in humans?
The wind helps many plants reproduce by ___.
The human hearing range is 20-20,000 hertz. A sound Peggy heard was measured at 15,000 hertz. Which characteristic best describes the sound wave that Peggy heard?
A student is asked to measure the distance from the floor to the ceiling in a classroom. Which unit of measurement should the student most likely use to accurately measure this distance?
Which of the following explains why elements, such as carbon and oxygen, that are used in organic molecules are not permanently removed from the environment?
A student is measuring the speed at which a ball rolls down a ramp. Which unit of measurement is the student most likely using to describe the speed of the ball?
Marta and Roger are comparing how long it takes two different types of seeds to sprout. They plant both types of seeds in similar pots, place them in a sunny window, and water them daily. If they want to conduct their investigation correctly, which information is most important to record?
Deposition of sediment will most likely form a
During a space mission, scientists will send experiments for the astronauts to conduct in space. In many cases, scientists have made predictions about the outcome of the experiment. Why do astronauts perform the experiment if the results have already been predicted?
Approximately 14,000 years ago, the climate in North America began to warm rapidly. At the same time, human hunters migrated to the continent. Which of these most likely resulted from a combination of these two factors?
Which is an SI unit for density?
In the United States, each day the Sun appears to
Which substance is magnetic and conducts heat?
During a biochemical reaction, pyruvate (C3H4O3) is converted into carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). In what cellular organelle does this biochemical reaction occur?
A student fails to eat a balanced diet over a period of time. This lack of a balanced diet can lead to
In 1989, an oil spill off the coast of Alaska led to a decline in the population of many organisms. Which other population was most likely affected by the drop in population of the fish, otters, and seals?
Which of these is the best reason for exercising on space flights?
With the development of the microscope, scientists were able to see cells for the first time. Why was it difficult to view cells without a microscope?
Fertilizers can enable farmers to grow the same crop in a field for several years in a row. Farmers who use less fertilizer often rotate their crops by planting the crop one year and legumes, such as beans and clover, the following year. Fertilizer use and crop rotation with legumes both increase the availability of which of the following nutrients in soil?
Which two processes occur during the life spans of all animals?
Which of the following is true regarding the properties of an air mass?
When entire communities in an ecosystem change over time, it is known as
What should be added to soil to increase its water retention?
A rosebush and a bird are similar because they both
The mineral quartz naturally forms in various colors. Which difference in quartz formation results in the different colors?
What happens to a moist air mass as it moves upward in the atmosphere?
Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb infrared radiation from Earth's surface and re-radiates some of it back to Earth. Which of these gases have the most significant impact on the temperature of Earth's atmosphere?
Volcanoes are considered constructive because they
What happens to sugar when it is combined with water?
Pesticides are chemicals that kill insects. What could happen if the pesticides killed all the pollinators near some apple trees?
Which statement describes the formation of a delta?
Hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water. The water in this reaction is described as
Which of these cell parts store genetic instructions for the entire organism and transfers them from one generation to the next?
Which list describes the particles that make up an atom?
Earth has a limited supply of fresh drinking water. Which method is used to recycle water for humans to use?
A plover bird eats bits of food that become stuck in a crocodile's teeth without being hurt. The crocodile gets its teeth cleaned and the bird gets food. Which type of relationship exists between the bird and the crocodile?
What can scientists learn about the past by studying sedimentary rocks?
A scientific explanation should include a demonstration of the relationships between
A plant that has traits identical to the parent plant provides evidence that the plant
Which property would best help a student determine if two substances are made of two different elements?
Evidence of organisms that lived on Earth a long time ago would most likely be found in
Which type of energy does a radiator give off ?
While hiking through Granville State Forest, a student finds an unusual plant-like organism that appears to lack chlorophyll. When the student examines a sample using a microscope, he sees many cells with cell walls and no chloroplasts. This organism is most likely a member of what Kingdom?
A student conducts an experiment to determine the effect soap has on the growth of radish seeds. He puts 30 seeds in three different dishes: one with water, one with a 1% soap solution, and one with a 10% soap solution. Which type of data should he collect?
Which of the following statements best describes how the use of interchangeable parts has affected car manufacturing?
Which quantity must equal zero if a car is moving at a constant rate along a straight line?
Which widely used energy sources are nonrenewable and also a source of greenhouse gas emissions?
Use the information below to answer the question. In solid fuel rockets, a fuel mixture is burned and once the mixture starts burning it cannot be stopped. In liquid fuel rockets, there is a tank of fuel and a tank of oxygen. The burning of the fuel can be stopped by preventing the flow of fuel and oxygen into the combustion chamber. Based on this information, which system is more highly developed in liquid fuel rockets than in solid fuel rockets?
Some research has shown that the burning of fossil fuels contributes to an effect called global warming, which scientists believe is changing the chemical makeup of Earth's atmosphere. Use of which invention would help lower this effect?
Which food contains the highest percentage of protein?
When conducting an investigation involving an open flame, it is most important to
In ecosystems where people live, which of the following are most likely to cause an increase in diseases transmitted by water?
Aphids are small insects that sometimes live near ants. The ants protect the aphids from predators. The aphids produce a sweet substance that the ants eat. Which statement describes the relationship between ants and aphids?
Soil will pack down over time which decreases the ability of the soil to hold water. Which animals would best help the soil hold water?
At an archaeological dig site, scientists, volunteers, and students collect items used by people living hundreds of years ago. To determine the history of the different people who may have lived at the site, which is the best method to classify the recovered items?
It is hypothesized that in the next 200 years, the lowest land areas on Earth could be submerged beneath rising oceans. Which climate change would most likely cause this to occur?
Miriam notices when she goes to the beach that sometimes the water rises as high as the pier. At other times of the day, the water barely covers the pillars under the pier. These differences in water level are primarily due to the gravitational influence of which of the following?
Copper (Cu) reacts with oxygen (O) to form copper oxide (CuO). The properties of CuO are most likely
Carbon dioxide produced by cells is removed from the body primarily by which body system?
The ocean minimum zone, or OMZ, is an area from 200 to 600 meters below the ocean's surface. The OMZ is dark and cold, with oxygen concentrations less than 10% of concentrations in surface water. Oxygen concentrations are so low because of bacterial activity that breaks down organic material falling from surface waters. Given the conditions in the OMZ, which of these dissolved gases would you expect to find in large concentrations in this zone?
Two students went fishing one morning and caught 20 fish. The afternoon before, they caught 5 fish. Because of their morning success, they claimed that morning was the best time to fish. Which of these would most likely disprove their claim?
Which question can be answered by scientific experimentation and observation?
During cellular respiration glucose molecules undergo a series of reactions. This process results in the formation of up to 38 molecules of high-energy ATP per each molecule of glucose. Which is the source of the energy stored in these ATP molecules?
Lea is investigating how phosphates affect oxygen levels in pond water. For part of the investigation, she uses pond water that contains no phosphates. The pond water without phosphates would be what part of the investigation?
Which tool should a student use to examine spots on a frog?
A group of scientists is studying the effect of cell phone signals on honeybees. Before starting the investigation, the scientists stated that the bees exposed to cell phone signals will have difficulty finding their way back to the hive. Which term best describes the statement made by the group of scientists?
Which system is most responsible for transporting blood throughout the body?
Five hundred flies of one species were sprayed with a new insecticide. Twenty-four hours later, nearly all the flies were dead. However, a few survived. Which principle best explains why some flies survived?
A student investigated the effect of the color of light on the growth of plants. Red, yellow, and green lights were used in the experiment. If another student were to conduct the same experiment, which would be the most important procedure to follow to yield the same results?
A large mammal lives in a cold, snowy environment. Which adaptation would best help the mammal survive in low temperatures?
The temperatures in space vary from extremely cold to extremely hot. Earth's surface temperature is relatively stable. Which of these is most responsible for Earth's surface temperatures?
Which of the following correctly lists the organizational hierarchy of organisms from simplest to most complex?
The carrion flower smells like rotting meat. What kind of pollinator is most likely attracted to the carrion flower?
Which of the following best explains why the pressure inside a high-flying airplane must be controlled?
Hurricanes are large, powerful storms that form as they travel over warm ocean waters. What do oceans add to make hurricanes so strong?
Abnormal cell division may result in
What is the main reason humans need nitrogen to survive?
The phases of the Moon are daily changes in the appearance of the Moon. One reason Moon phases occur is because the Moon reflects sunlight. Which is another reason that the phases of the Moon occur?
Some campers are sitting around a campfire outside their tent. Which product of the fire is in the form of electromagnetic waves?
Jon had a flat tire on his car. He used a hydraulic jack to lift the car up so that he could change the tire. If Jon knows the amount of force used to lift the car 0.25 meter off of the ground, what is he able to calculate?
Which organ is made mostly of muscle?
Which is considered a property of soil?
Which of these had the greatest impact on the current shape of Nevada's basin and range landscape?
Which of the following is the primary way that evergreen trees planted on the north and west sides of residences in Massachusetts help reduce winter heating costs?
Air is composed of nitrogen, oxygen, and other gases. Based on that information, air can be described as
Which action should be taken in order to identify the streak of a mineral during an investigation?
In Type 1 diabetes, the immune system attacks the pancreatic cells that produce insulin. Without insulin, people that have Type 1 diabetes are unable to regulate blood glucose levels. What two symptoms are most likely associated with Type 1 diabetes?
When the cardboard cone of a radio speaker vibrates, it produces a sound in the air around it. The cone produces this sound by transferring which of the following to the air around it?
During a demonstration, a teacher pours CO_{2} gas over a candle, putting out the flame. Which physical property allows the teacher to pour the CO_{2} gas?
Atoms of the same element can have different atomic masses because they can have different numbers of
Which would be the best conductor of electricity?
Part of a scientific method involves collecting data in order to
Gravity is a measurable force of attraction which acts upon objects. Which characteristic determines the gravity of an object?
Which is NOT an example of a chemical change?
Seasons in Alaska are primarily caused by which factor as Earth revolves around the Sun?
A student needs to measure out a precise amount of liquid. What is the best tool for the student to use?
An octopus squirts black ink around itself to hide from predators. This adaptation is an example of
Earthquakes are vibrations of Earth's crust. What device is used to measure the size of an earthquake?
A girl found the skull of an animal. She did not know what the animal was but she was sure that it preyed on other animals for its food. What clue led to this conclusion?
Which one of these animals does NOT lay eggs?
Which characteristic does a euglena share with an amoeba?
Which of the following is most likely to disrupt the natural balance in an ecosystem?
Which of these correctly lists Earth's layers in order from the center to the surface?
The element nitrogen can be found in simple, nonliving substances, such as air, and in complex molecules in living organisms, such as DNA. Which statement explains why nitrogen can exist in many compounds?
An enzyme in the Golgi apparatus catalyzes the addition of phosphates to which class of molecule?
Which is an example of water condensing? 1.
A delta at the mouth of a river is the direct result of
Scientists have studied convergent boundaries and the results of the collisions. Besides the fact that mountains occur at these boundaries, which other part of the rock cycle is most likely associated with these areas of convergence?
Which statement best describes the effect deforestation has on Earth's atmosphere?
Many scientists think that when birds migrate to the same location each year, they find this location by using Earth's
Which form of energy do plants need to capture in order to perform photosynthesis?
A large number of species on Earth became extinct during a short time period about 65 million years ago. Based on this pattern of extinction, which is the most likely cause?
Sofia put a bat house in a tree in her yard. The bats ate mosquitos in Sofia's yard at night and roosted in the house during the day. Droppings from the bat house nourished the tree. What kind of relationship exists between Sofia, the bats, and the tree?
Which of the following is the most basic need for a plant?
A scientific article about the universe will most likely describe the universe as
Which tool would be most useful for observing the details of an insect's wings?
The instructions below outline the procedure for a demonstration. Materials: four 100 g metal blocks, each of a different metal four polystyrene foam cups, each containing 150 g of 10°C water Procedure: 1. Place the four cups of water next to each other on the lab bench. 2. Heat each block to a temperature of 60°C. 3. Place each heated block in a separate cup of 10°C water. 4. Measure the temperature change in each cup of water after 100 s. At the end of the demonstration, which block raised the temperature of the 10°C water the greatest amount?
On the Galapagos Islands, an iguana that lives in the water is most likely able to survive without competition from an iguana that lives on land because it
Which of these warms most of the air, water, and land on Earth?
A teacher was discussing with the class that a bowling ball has more inertia than a basketball. Which physical property is most likely being compared?
A dark colored wall becomes warm when the Sun is shining on it. After the Sun sets, a person standing a meter away can feel warmth from the wall. How does heat transfer from the wall to the person?
During exercise, the cardiovascular system works together with the respiratory system to
How does flipping a switch turn on a light?
A ship has a satellite communication device to identify the ship's position at sea. For which of the following activities is this device most likely used?
The purpose of thorns on a plant is most likely to
Which of the following is best classified as a nonrenewable resource?
Which of these are the deepest parts of the ocean?
Which human body system forms a barrier between internal body structures and the external environment?
Decaying plants and animals are important to an ecosystem because they
The area of a small ocean island is slowly shrinking. This is most likely the result of which occurrence?
Which of these will most likely result from small meteoroids entering the atmosphere of Earth?
A main advantage to organisms that reproduce sexually is
A pan containing hot water is left on the counter and becomes cool mainly due to
James placed a breath mint and a lump of toothpaste in a cup of water and let it sit overnight. Which statement best explains why the breath mint was gone the following morning, but the toothpaste was still at the bottom of the cup?
Which is an inherited characteristic on a horse?
Scientists classify matter into various groups. Which group is typically described by the characteristics listed below? • usually solid at room temperature • can be bent or changed in shape without breaking • show a shiny luster when scratched or polished
Sound waves travel the fastest through dense materials. Through which of these would sound waves travel the SLOWEST?
A student dissolves a spoonful of sugar in a glass of water and makes a
Many scientists are convinced that an increase of certain gases in the atmosphere is affecting global temperatures. What makes this hypothesis difficult to prove?
How can the rate of an infectious disease be drastically reduced?
Which is needed to determine the amount of gravitational force between two objects?
Which tool, when properly used, would best help a student classify a basket of apples into groups based on mass?
Ice cubes are an example of which form of water?
Which explains how the epithelium offers protection to land-dwelling vertebrates?
Which is the most likely way a scientist collects data during an experiment?
Which must be present in order for something to be classified as an organism?
Which mineral is most likely to be found in all of the three major rock types known as metamorphic, igneous, and sedimentary?
A student rubs her hands together on a cold winter day. The heat that warms her hands is produced by
When ocean waters become too warm, some whales travel to colder water. This movement is an example of
Students visit an aquarium and watch how an octopus behaves in its tank. Which behavior did the octopus most likely learn from its aquarium environment?
The main function of a fish's fins is to help the fish
Stars appear to be blue, white, yellow, and red, even without the aid of a telescope. What causes the different colors of the stars?
What keeps the planets in orbit around the Sun?
Use the information below to answer the question. Cotton is a plant product used to make fabric. Cotton is made of cellulose, a fiber not digestible by humans. Cellulose is composed of many sugar molecules bonded together into long chains. Each sugar molecule contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. When cotton fabric is washed, wrinkles often form. The clothing industry uses chemicals to manufacture some cotton fabrics that are wrinkle-free. Dyes are also added to color the cellulose fibers in cotton. A feature that is common to both cellulose and sugar is that both are
Which animal is an example of an annelid?
What ALWAYS happens when the nucleotides in a strand of DNA is rearranged?
The surface of Earth is composed of large tectonic plates that are constantly shifting as they float on top of molten rock. Which process must occur in the mantle to make the plates move?
Which set of tools would be best to use for dissecting in a biology lab?
Which of these moves in a regular path around the Sun?
Which would best allow a species to survive environmental changes?
An electrical component that has a continuous path for electrons to flow is called
In certain areas, tectonic plates move over hot spots. Which landforms are most likely associated with these hot spots?
Which tools are used to determine the boiling point of water?
A substance that carries sound waves is called
Which force causes a bicycle to slow down when the brakes are used?
The ichthyornis was a type of bird that lived over 65 million years ago. It lived near the sea and hunted for fish over the water. Fossils have been found in Kansas, many miles from the present-day ocean. Which cause of extinction is most likely to be found in the fossil record along with ichthyornis fossils?
Indigo buntings are birds that nest in Florida during the summer. Male buntings are bright blue in color while females are a dull brown. How does the dull brown color of the female buntings help the species survive?
Which of these things will dissolve in water?
Students combined baking soda and vinegar to demonstrate a chemical reaction. What indicates that a chemical reaction occurred?
The loudness of sound can be changed by
A mineral sample is obtained from a box, and acid is dropped on the sample to determine if it bubbles. Which best describes what should be done with the mineral after testing it?
At what temperature does water begin to boil?
Rosa and Ted ate granola bars before competing in a swimming competition. Less than 50% of the chemical energy in the granola bars was converted to mechanical energy during the swim competition. If all the energy in the granola bars was used, which most likely happened to the rest of the energy?
What is the primary energy source driving circulation of ocean currents on Earth?
Which statement best explains why the force of a hurricane diminishes as the hurricane moves over land?
n 1931, Barbara McClintock discovered that genes could change position on a chromosome. In corn plants, if a certain gene was moved next to the gene that controls kernel color, the kernels in an ear of corn were various colors. Which statement best supports McClintock's discovery?
The breaking of a mineral into small, flat sheets is known as
Which location on Earth receives the most direct sunlight?
All living things are made up of prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. Which function is found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?
Jamal lives in the Northern Hemisphere. Which season is it when the Northern Hemisphere is pointed away from the Sun?
What is an energy change that takes place in a light bulb?
When an electric fan is running, most of the incoming electrical energy changes into which kind of energy?
Which trait does a cactus seedling inherit from its parents?
The freezing point of nitrous oxide is -91°C. Which of the following statements best describes the effect on the particles in liquid nitrous oxide as its temperature is lowered to -91°C?
Which of the following will absorb heat energy?
Which behavior will best help a student stay healthy?
Which of these includes Earth?
The vertical axis on a graph is the y-axis. What is most likely placed along the y-axis?
Monica learned that humans are born knowing how to do some things and they learn how to do other things. Which is a behavior humans learn?
Which factor will cause a decrease in the force of attraction between two magnets?
What event occurs because of the rotation of Earth?
The identifying characteristic of an element is its number of
A species of wasp lays its eggs in the larva of another insect. The wasp is a parasite, and the larva is the host. What is the relationship between the parasite and the host?
Which structural characteristic is present in a paramecium that is not present in an amoeba?
The structures in the bodies of many organisms have levels of organization that help the body to carry out life processes. Which list correctly shows how these levels are organized from the simplest to the most complex?
Which safety gear are most important to wear when working near an open flame?
Recycling is important to the environment because it
Jamil studied how the position of Earth around the Sun affects the energy available on Earth. Which best explains why a particular place on Earth receives more energy during summer months than winter months?
Shale is a common sedimentary rock. Which of these was required to form shale?
In the water cycle, rain, snow, or sleet falling to the ground is a form of
Cells perform many different processes that an organism needs to survive and grow. Which is the main function of the process of cellular respiration?
A student places soil in a plastic container to make a home for some worms. The student cuts holes in the top of the container because the worms need
If it is determined that the particles in one solid are arranged in a repeating pattern and the particles in another solid are arranged randomly, what must be true about the solids?
When manned space exploration began, NASA used the gravity assist concept so that spacecraft could conserve fuel. Which statement explains why the gravity assist concept was useful for spacecraft to successfully travel and return to Earth?
In which of the following organs is an acid produced?
It took Stephen 12 seconds to run across a grass field. Which additional information does he need in order to calculate his acceleration during the run?
What are two of Earth's natural resources?
In New England, there are noticeable patterns of seasonal change. Which information could you collect to BEST illustrate this change?
Volume and mass are properties of
Which of the following do water (H2O), rust (Fe2O3), and salt (NaCl) have in common?
Which of these careers would a student studying biotechnology most likely pursue?
The first person to introduce the idea of the continents moving around the surface of Earth was
The cells of organisms found in the phylum Porifera (sponges) are not organized into tissues. What structures are absent in organisms belonging to the phylum Porifera?
A class wanted to see which paper airplane design could fly the farthest. In order to have the most accurate results, every student should
The following advertisement was placed in the window of a camping supply store. "The double-thermal 'Polar Snooze' sleeping bag is here! It will keep you warm for winter camping!" Based on this advertisement, the best conclusion about Polar Snooze sleeping bags is that they
About how long does it take for Earth to make one revolution around the Sun?
Twins are born. One is a boy and one is a girl. Which statement is correct about their genetic makeup?
Which particles are responsible for the electric charge of an atom?
Which is the best source of vitamins and minerals?
Copper wire is often wrapped in plastic. Plastic material is a good
Teresa is making a list of the similarities and differences between a euglena and a volvox cell. In which way is the euglena different from the volvox cell?
If the body takes in more food than it uses.
The mass of an object is measured using which unit?
The Sun transforms matter into energy through nuclear fusion. What can be inferred about the Sun from this fact?
Which job is done in Virginia only during the fall season?
A scientist is studying the effect of acid rain on oak trees. Of the numbers below, which would be the number of oak trees the scientist should use to obtain the most reliable data?
Camouflage MOST helps an animal with which of these life needs?
There are a variety of events that can disrupt ecosystems. Some events result in local disturbances and others can affect a much larger area. Which event would most likely result in change on a global scale?
A hardware designer finds that the wiring in a circuit is releasing enough heat to make the circuit dangerously hot. Which change would best solve this problem?
There are different kinds of muscles in the human body. Each muscle is formed from a group of cells that works together. The main function of a group of muscle cells is to
Four objects are on a wooden ramp. Which object is most likely to roll off the ramp if it is pushed gently?
When zinc and copper are melted together, brass is formed. Brass is an example of
Choose the investigation that would best answer the question: Does the length of a string change how fast a pendulum swings?
Meiosis is necessary for which reproductive event to occur?
Some astronauts may spend several months in space orbiting Earth. Where do these astronauts most likely stay while in space?
Which is a possible consequence of global warming?
A brown bear eats a variety of foods including berries, insects, and small animals. Which best describes a brown bear?
In which part of a plant cell does photosynthesis occur?
Which alternative energy resource adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere?
Energy from the Sun changes a liquid to a gas by the process of
Which of the following is a result of the tilt of Earth's axis?
Chloroplasts absorb light energy. The function of the chloroplast is to
When water changes from a liquid to a gas and then the steam condenses back to the liquid form, these types of changes are
What direction is the movement of the energy in a food web?
When the velocity of an ocean wave decreases as it approaches a shore, what happens to the wave?
Which is a force that keeps Earth in orbit around the Sun?
Substances enter any plant or animal cell by passing through which of the following structures?
Many years ago, purple dye was made from some sea animals. Then, in 1856, William Perkins tried to make a new medicine. Instead, he found a way to make purple dye from coal. What is a positive effect of his discovery?
When magnesium (Mg) metal is burned in the presence of oxygen (O?), magnesium oxide (MgO) is produced. The properties of magnesium oxide are different than the individual properties of magnesium and oxygen because magnesium oxide is
Fossils of sea animals were found in a cave in Arkansas. What does this mean about that area of Arkansas in the past?
Which instrument would be best for measuring the volume of a pebble?
Which of these is a waste product of plant cells?
It can take millions of years for fossil fuels to form. These fossil fuels form underground from decaying plants and animals. Which term best describes a fossil fuel?
Earth's hydrosphere is best described as the
When riding a roller coaster, an electric motor pulls the roller coaster to the top of the first hill. What force pulls the roller coaster down the hill?
Which of these organisms is classified as a decomposer?
A cold-blooded vertebrate with smooth skin belongs to what class of animals?
Which of these best describes a tornado?
Plants use carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during the process of
A reverse fault occurs when one side of a fault plane is driven up over the other side. Reverse faults can cause which of these landforms?
A student is collecting water samples. The student needs a container that holds water, will not break easily, and can be used many times. Which of the following containers will best meet the student's needs?
What condition is most likely to spread an illness between people?
When scientists proposed the Theory of Continental Drift, there were many skeptics. Which discovery confirmed that the continents move on plates?
Which two things are produced when a plant breaks down sugar to release energy?
A scientist wants to track contaminant movement in the Gulf Stream. The Gulf Stream is a warm water current in the North Atlantic Ocean and is part of the North Atlantic gyre. The gyre is influenced by the Coriolis effect. To follow the contaminant after it exits the Gulf Stream, the scientist needs to know characteristics of the North Atlantic gyre. Which of these best describes a movement of the North Atlantic gyre the scientist needs to know?
The growing human population has many practices that adversely impact the environment. Acid rain is one example of environmental damage that is related to human activities. Which human activity is most likely the largest contributor to acid rain?
What happens to the water vapor in an air mass as it ascends?
Which two terms are used to describe weather?
In what unit of time does Earth orbit the Sun?
While conducting an experiment on gravity, what will be needed to ensure the safety of students?
All of the populations of species in an area make up a
Cell division is necessary for an organism to
A large plant population may impose selective pressure on a smaller, isolated group of plants, resulting in a change in allele distribution. Which mechanism is responsible for this change in the allele distribution?
Two samples of gold must have the same
A student organizes a list of the distances that five students ran in 10 minutes. Another way to best organize this data is by using a
What is the dependent variable in this experiment?
Electricity is produced in a hydroelectric plant when moving water turns a turbine. Which describes this energy transformation from the turning turbine to electricity?
When a star explodes, an intensely bright object is formed. What is the name of this object?
The Earth's equator receives more direct sunlight than the regions to its north and south. This distribution of sunlight accounts directly for which phenomenon?
The class puts the planters by the window so that the plants can get more sunlight. How do the tomato plants use sunlight?
Which of these is the most serious impact to an ecosystem after a tornado?
Gravity is responsible for the ___.
Some runners ate pasta before a race. The pasta was broken down into simple sugars and was absorbed by the blood stream. What body system was responsible for breaking down the pasta into small nutrients for use in the cells of the runners?
Which crustal feature forms when two continental plates collide?
At which location does the movement of tectonic plates form isolated volcanic islands, such as Hawaii?
Which current property of our solar system is mainly due to solar emissions occurring soon after the initiation of fusion in the Sun's core?
Water puddles on a sidewalk evaporate when the Sun heats the water. Which of these best describes what is happening as the water evaporates?
Clara says that her school is in a desert. Which fact about her schoolyard most helps her claim?
What process is most responsible for the extinction of most species of plants and animals that have lived on Earth?
The scientific method is the inquiry process by which scientists raise and attempt to answer new questions. Which is the best way to communicate findings that result from scientific inquiry?
Trevor turns on a lamp. When the lamp is on, electrical energy changes into which other form of energy?
People often wear sunglasses in polar regions because most of the sunlight that strikes a snow-covered surface is
A plant is discolored and has large brown blotches on its leaves. This condition is most likely caused by
Which is a characteristic of sedimentary rock?
Which gas is transported by the circulatory system in humans and is used by cells during respiration to release energy stored in food?
Which of the following planets has the shortest orbit around the Sun?
Rivers leave behind small pieces of rocks after they flood. These small pieces of rock form a floodplain. Which words best describe a floodplain?
Some scientists believe that the mass extinction of dinosaurs was caused by the impact of a large meteorite on Earth. This impact would have caused a darkening of the sky due to dust blown into the upper atmosphere. This darkening would have reduced the sizes of some ecosystems because of
Which material is the best conductor of electricity?
Which is an example of a nonliving thing?
What is a characteristic of sedimentary rock?
Rock that is made of material that has settled to the bottom of lakes and oceans and been compressed and hardened is
Which are caused by the Coriolis Effect?
Which of the following compounds is most likely to be part of living organisms?
The Sun produces energy through
Which device is used to determine the volume of a liquid?
Mrs. Garry's class wants to know if their area has more acid rain than other parts of the state. Which would be the best way for them to begin research?
Which illustrates the correct order of relationships in organisms?
Which is evidence that the universe is expanding?
Which of these statements is true about the parts that make up the atom?
A certain fossil (Y) is found in a layer of rock that lies between two index fossils, X and Z. Surprisingly, the older of the index fossils (Z) is found above the other fossils, suggesting that the rock layer has overturned. Which dating method is best to confirm the rock layer has overturned by determining the ages of these fossils?
Which items would be most useful at home during a power failure?
Energy flows in an ecosystem through food webs. Which form of energy is the least available for reuse in a food web?
Which of the following fasteners are best to use to fasten the sides of a wooden birdhouse?
In areas where a lot of earthquakes occur, architects are designing buildings with the ability to move with the land. How are the new building designs most likely to help people?
In which form is most of the energy released from gasoline when burned by an automobile?
Heart disease can result in a reduced amount of oxygen moving properly through the body. Which body system does heart disease most directly affect?
The oil used today is made from the ancient remains of tiny sea creatures called "Diatoms." When they were alive, the Diatoms converted sunlight into stored energy. Based on this information, which of the following statements is true?
Skunks spray a strong-smelling liquid to ___.
Which is an example of mechanical weathering?
Recycling newspapers is good for the environment because it
Rocks and minerals are common materials found on Earth. Which property do most rocks and minerals share?
Which organs belong to the lymphatic system?
The hardness, odor, and taste of an object can all be
A bird called a ptarmigan has feathered feet. The feathers on the feet of the ptarmigan are most helpful when this bird ___.
What is responsible for changing the remains of prehistoric sea animals into natural gas?
Which is a basic structure found in all living organisms?
To calculate the relative age of rocks, geologists use the rate of radioactive decay of isotopes present in their samples. What is the term used for the original amount of the elemental isotopes being investigated?
An echo is a sound wave that has been
The central nervous system consists of two parts: the brain and the
A small town is building their first water treatment plant. Their primary disinfectant is UV radiation. Which contaminant will UV radiation eliminate?
Which of the following must be included with magnitude to represent a vector?
What does a fire take away from a forest that squirrels need to survive?
Nitrogen, a nutrient found in fertilizer, helps plants increase in size. Rainwater runoff often carries fertilizer into ponds and lakes. What effect does excess nitrogen have on organisms in a pond or lake ecosystem?
Which measurement is the most accurate way to describe the distance between the Sun and its nearest neighboring star?
Which four elements make up most of the human body?
An area is semiarid, has few trees, and is home to ground-nesting birds. This area is most likely part of which biome?
Which organisms make energy available to all other organisms in a food chain?
Which of these substances is correctly identified as a mineral?
Two objects are at rest and are 1.0 meter apart. To reduce the gravitational pull between the two objects, they should be
Soil color is closely related to its content. Which element causes soil to appear red?
Which particles make up the mass of an atom?
Auroras occur where Earth's magnetosphere traps high-energy particles in which region of the atmosphere?
An experiment was performed at sea-level. 400 mL of water was put in 4 different-shaped containers and placed on hot plates with 4 different temperature settings as shown below. Beaker - 110°C Petri dish - 95°C Erlenmeyer flask - 60°C Round bottom bowl - 45°C Which characteristic of water remained the same in each container?
In plants, what is responsible for passing traits from one generation to the next?
Which safety measure should a student take when handling a microscope?
Which statement best describes the size of the Sun?
A wetland was drained to build a mall. Two years later, there were no more toads in that area. Why did the toads disappear?
Technological advances are allowing scientists to develop methods for replacing abnormal human genes with healthy copies of the same genes. Which is the most likely use for this gene therapy?
Which statement about plant and animal cells is true?
Finding fossils of warm-weather plants in the rock layers of a cold northern island suggests that
The hereditary material in corn plants can be altered by scientists so the plants produce more corn. Which term identifies this process?
What is the main function of red blood cells?
Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur both on land and in water. Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions most often occur
An earthworm has a length of 12.8 centimeters. What is the length, in millimeters, of the earthworm?
Which material has the least resistance to the flow of electricity?
Which are replenished more quickly than they are used?
What is the first thing a student should do before starting an experiment?
Which of the following parts of the human body is most complex?
The Wright Brothers' invention has had the greatest impact on
Which best describes how earthworms improve soil as they eat dead plant material?
Use the information below to answer the question. Cotton is a plant product used to make fabric. Cotton is made of cellulose, a fiber not digestible by humans. Cellulose is composed of many sugar molecules bonded together into long chains. Each sugar molecule contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. When cotton fabric is washed, wrinkles often form. The clothing industry uses chemicals to manufacture some cotton fabrics that are wrinkle-free. Dyes are also added to color the cellulose fibers in cotton. How would a clothing manufacturer separate colors to determine the purity of the dyes?
What property of water is most important for living organisms?
An astronomer and a marine biologist were having lunch and discussing their current experiments. They discovered that although they investigate different areas of science, they most likely use the same
Fossil fuels are formed
Which had the greatest impact on the way humans heat their homes?
Use the information below to answer the question. Many people are concerned that the reduction in the number of acres of forested area on Earth will lead to a large reduction in the amount of oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. If this happens, an organism's ability to breathe would be affected. The effect would be similar to moving the organism from
Which of these is an example of a chemical reaction?
Which of these tools is best for recording observations outdoors?
Students are investigating the physical properties of three solid mixtures by placing each solid mixture in liquid water. What physical property are the students testing?
What remains in the same location in the sky of the Northern Hemisphere each night?
Which feature makes up most of the surface of Earth?
Which of these situations would most likely be a result of climate change?
A student performs an investigation using anti-bacterial hand soap. The student washes only his left hand with anti-bacterial soap, but cultures swabs from both hands. The cultures from both hands were incubated at room temperature for 48 hours before being examined. Which best explains the purpose of using soap on only the left hand?
Raquel fed a litter of five kittens an all-meat diet for two weeks and found that they gained an average of 15 ounces. She concluded that eating meat is the best way to help kittens grow. What should Raquel have done to make this a better experiment?
In the 1600s a scientist named Anton van Leeuwenhoek worked toward improving microscopes and created his own lenses. With his microscopes, Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria and muscle fibers. Which type of job benefited most from these discoveries?
One advantage of a hand lens over a microscope is that the hand lens
Raising livestock, such as sheep and cattle, results in the production of large amounts of methane gas (CH4). Methane has the same effect in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2). As more livestock are raised to provide food for humans, what is the most likely effect of the increase in methane?
Which is most directly responsible for building up a river delta?
What explains how day and night occur in different parts of Earth?
The human body is made up of different levels of organization. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a specific function. Which would be an example of a tissue in the human body?
In the rock cycle, sedimentary rock forms when rock is
Heating and cooling water change the state of matter of water. What happens when a block of ice is heated to 10° Celsius?
Which situation is the best example of an inherited trait?
Physical features help animals survive. Which statement best describes physical adaptations that occur through natural selection in changing environments?
The amount of which greenhouse gas in the air will increase the most if large forests are cut down to be used for building materials without planting new trees in their place?
A carpenter rubs sandpaper on a wooden bench to make the bench smoother. The sandpaper will get warm as it is rubbed on the bench. As a result of the friction between the sandpaper and the bench, thermal energy is converted to
What is the green pigment that allows plants to change the Sun's energy into chemical energy?
Which scientist hypothesized that the environment can affect the characteristics of a species?
Which statement describes the reason why an ice cube melts when set out in a warm room?
Two characteristics of the Nevada climate are low humidity and abundant sunshine. This combination of characteristics most likely results in
In order to survive, all animals need
Which best explains why population growth can result in water shortages and rationing in certain areas?
Professor Walden studies genetics at a local university. She believes that she has discovered information that contradicts a widely accepted theory. As a scientist and leader in the study of genetics, which action should she take?
Canadian physician Sir William Osler once said, "In Science the credit goes to the man who convinces the world, not to the man to whom the idea first occurred." How does this quote apply to scientific knowledge?
Which event or principle cannot have its validity directly tested by laboratory experiment?
How do the circulatory system and the respiratory system depend on one another?
Oxygen and iron combine chemically to form rust. Rust is classified as which of the following?
A student made observations of four rock samples. Which of these observations most likely describes a sedimentary rock?
In 1931, Barbara McClintock discovered that genes could change position on a chromosome. In corn plants, if a certain gene was moved next to the gene that controls kernel color, the kernels in an ear of corn were various colors. Which statement best supports McClintock's discovery?
Herbivores obtain most of their energy by
Which factor has the greatest effect on a community's stores of freshwater?
A researcher's plan is to place five fish in separate tanks, give them the same amount of food each day, and keep the temperature the same. One fish will be exposed to artificial light for 24 hours each day, while the others will have light for 22 hours and then no light for 2 hours each day. Which is the control for this experiment?
Use The Periodic Table of the Elements and the information below to answer the question. Magnesium metal (Mg) is grayish-white in color and reacts actively with water. Fluorine (F2) is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature and is a member of the halogen family. These two elements react to produce magnesium fluoride (MgF2), a chemical commonly used in making windows and lenses. How does adding heat energy affect magnesium fluoride (MgF2) molecules?
A shift in climate changes a forested area with little annual snowfall to an area with snowfall most of the year. Natural selection would most likely favor a rabbit with which adaptation?
When humans move into an area, they sometimes plant grasses, flowers, or trees that are not native to the area. The non-native species sometimes choke out the native species. Which organism would most likely be harmed by a loss of native plants in the area?
What is a way of improving air quality?
Which tool should be used to measure the stem length of a plant?
In which of these organs does most absorption of nutrients take place?
Proper use and care of a microscope includes
All matter is made up of
Which physical change would most likely help an animal survive during the winter?
Which of these steps in the rock cycle occurs ONLY in the formation of metamorphic rock?
A tulip growing in a pot is placed at the center of a table. Which of these nearby objects will the tulip grow toward?
Common soaps are often basic. Which of these is a property of a chemical base?
As temperatures increase, which process is responsible for increasing the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere?
Why do some animals hibernate in the winter?
Which wind-water interaction is responsible for cycling nutrient-rich waters from the ocean floor to the sea surface?
If a cell is exposed to a chemical that inhibits the production of spindle fibers as the cell is preparing for mitosis, what would most likely happen?
Norma's flashlight was not working. She replaced the old batteries with new ones, and the flashlight turned on. Why did the flashlight work after she replaced the batteries?
The sun provides heat and light to Earth. The sun is best described as
A large piece of ice is placed on the sidewalk on a warm day. What will happen to the ice?
Ducks live near ponds and lakes. The shape of a duck's foot helps it swim and walk on muddy ground. Which factor is most important in determining the shape of a baby duck's foot?
The Moon revolves around the Earth because of a non-contact force. What force of Earth keeps the Moon in orbit?
Which motion causes the pattern of day and night on Earth?
What causes ocean water to evaporate in the water cycle?
Some cells, such as human nerve and muscle cells, contain many more mitochondria than do other cells, such as skin cells. Why do some cells have more mitochondria than others?
A student finds that an unidentified mineral sample can scratch gypsum but is unable to scratch quartz. The student has made an observation about which property of the sample?
Which process is the best example of weathering?
What is the major source of energy for food chains?
Elias investigates whether soaking beans in water before planting affects how the beans grow. Which beans would most likely be the control group?
What type of galaxy most likely can be described as a large, flat disk surrounded by arms of stars and dust?
Which is true of a car that is accelerating along a horizontal roadway?
A hypothesis that is successfully tested many times may become a
Which of the following do plants need to make their own food?
What is the result of the rapid shifting in Earth's surface?
Ned learned that light is a source of energy. Which can only result from light energy?
At which location are oceans the deepest?
Kendra's mom is purchasing a car, but cannot decide what color to get. Kendra advises her mom that a car with a black exterior will be uncomfortable in the summer. This observation is correct because dark objects, as compared to lighter colored objects,
Heart cells have fibers that slide up and down and cause contractions. Which types of specialized cells can contract?
What can we learn by studying fossils?
If a string on a musical instrument like a guitar is made tighter, the sound produced by that string will always be
Iron oxide, also known as rust, is formed when iron chemically combines with oxygen. Which term best describes iron oxide?
Which is a trait that a child can inherit from its parents?
Some dairy farmers want their cows to produce greater amounts of milk than average cows. Which process will help the dairy farmers develop cows with this trait?
Which tool will best help scientists understand relationships between oceans and climate changes?
A student mixes a spoonful of sand into a beaker of water. Which two methods can be used to separate the sand from the water?
A warm-blooded organism that nurses its young would be called
Elements on the Periodic Table of the Elements are classified into categories such as
In a genetics investigation, students used two red straws to represent male parent DNA. They used two green straws to represent female parent DNA. The offspring in this activity are best represented by
The process of cellular respiration occurs in
Ana rolled her wagon down the ramp to reach the playground. There, she and her sister played on the seesaw. Which set of simple machines has Ana used?
Which of these features, formed east of the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range, is due to moist air rising along the western slope of the mountain range?
Human activity most likely contributes to which of the following changes on Earth?
A student is reading the nutritional information on a box of cereal. It says that a single serving contains 215 calories. Which type of energy is being measured by this unit?
Crustal plates that pull apart from one another most likely form
A change in the position of an object as time changes best describes
What two organ systems are involved in the transfer of oxygen to the cells from outside the body?
Sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) are two reactive and dangerous elements. Chlorine is a halogen gas that can cause respiratory damage and sodium is an alkali metal that reacts violently with water. What happens to the properties of sodium and chlorine when they react to form sodium chloride (NaCl), common table salt?
Which list includes only examples of matter that can take the shape of a container?
Which source of energy is nonrenewable?
Which of the following is most necessary for life to develop on another planet?
Plants that are different from each another may have similar structures. Which structure do all plants have in common?
Which organism is a producer?
Some machines have been designed to perform complicated tasks which result from a demand for
Scientists are developing new satellite technology to help predict the weather. How will developing this technology most likely benefit people?
Which statement about gravity is written as a law?
What does the brain monitor to control the rate of breathing during normal activities?
A researcher is measuring changes in the density of the upper atmosphere over time. Which units should be used for the density measurements?
Which function requires the muscular, skeletal, and nervous systems to work together?
Michael Faraday showed how electric current in a wire produces
Mrs. Moyers teaches her students about different energy sources. Which example comes from a renewable source of energy?
What is at the center of our solar system?
Which device directly converts chemical energy into electrical energy?
Some students have gathered a collection of rock samples from the school yard to study. They scraped the rocks against a piece of quartz from the school lab. Which property of minerals are the students investigating?
Which organisms eat only plants?
Which of the following is a characteristic of the "steady state theory" of the universe?
A sunspot appears as a dark spot on the sun that is cooler than the surrounding area. On which region of the sun do sunspots occur?
The Great Miami Aquifer is a large underground water supply that lies under much of southwest Ohio. The water level of the aquifer could be reduced over time by too much
What kind of energy conversion occurs after a candle is lit?
What is one way the body reacts to cold weather?
Running to escape danger is an action that requires the nervous system to coordinate the interaction of which two body systems?
What causes day and night on Earth?
Which is the best explanation of why the Moon revolves around Earth?
Which observation provides evidence of the existence of planets orbiting other stars?
Mutations that occur in sex cells can be passed from parent to offspring during
Which type of ecosystem has the greatest variation in temperature from its top to its bottom?
What two factors determine the location of an electron around the nucleus of the atom?
The removal of waste from Florida's East Bay and Pensacola Bay is intended to speed the bay ecosystem's natural tendency to do which of the following?
Matter is defined as anything that takes up space and has
Which is the order of the planets from closest to the Sun to farthest from the Sun?
In living things, large and complex molecules are broken down into small and simple molecules. What is this process called?
Meadow voles are small mouse-like animals that eat plants and insects. Their niche in an ecosystem is a
A dietary supplement manufacturer developed a new calcium supplement that appears to increase the bone density in middle-aged women. When tested in a small clinical trial, the supplement was shown to cause a 15% increase in bone density in 8 out of 10 women. Before the supplement is offered to the general public, which step should the manufacturer take next?
The European starling entered North America in the late 1800s. It proved very successful and was able to spread throughout the United States by 1955. The survival and rapid reproduction of starlings most likely limited the population size of which organisms within its habitats?
Which does 12.0 grams represent?
Which of the following statements best describes the process of natural selection in a population?
A researcher is working on a family genetics project. She wants to trace a particular trait back through several generations of her ancestors. Which type of display will best help the researcher organize the information?
Joyce put 200 milliliters of water in a beaker, put a thermometer in it, and heated it until it started to boil. She recorded a temperature of 100°C when it started to boil. She repeated the process with 400 milliliters of water. What would be the temperature when this second sample started to boil?
Between 40 and 50 million years ago, the landmass on the Indian plate collided with the landmass on the Eurasian plate. What formed when these landmasses collided?
Hawaii is composed mainly of volcanoes with gentle slopes and large surface areas. Which characteristics best describe the lava these volcanoes have released?
Mrs. Henderson's class has five small covered boxes. One contains perfume; another contains dried onions. There is also a box of pine needles, a box of lemon pieces, and a box with a paper towel wetted with vanilla flavoring. Which should they do to get the best information about what is in each box?
Which of these best describes the relationship between Earth's layers?
A neutral atom is best described as having
Which statement best describes a learned characteristic in a dog?
In the Northern Hemisphere, June 21st has more hours of sunlight than any other day. However, June 21st has the fewest hours of sunlight in the Southern Hemisphere. Which best explains why the Northern Hemisphere receives more daylight than the Southern Hemisphere on the same day?
Which of these shows the correct order needed for a solar eclipse to happen?
A greenhouse is an example of a closed system. Which two types of energy are exchanged in this system?
Which of the following has changed over the last 200 years primarily due to human activity?
What physical property is characteristic of all of the elements in the group located in the rightmost column of the periodic table?
Which difference between land and water contributes most directly to global climate change resulting from tectonic movement?
How does the Sun most affect the water cycle?
Many sports stadiums use grass, but some use fake grass called artificial turf. Artificial turf is made of fibers that look like real grass. In which way is this technology most likely beneficial?
The western coast of the United States has been increasing in size for millions of years. Which process has added material to the western coast of the United States?
Which of the following structures enables fish to remain at a certain depth without expending energy through swimming?
Before strip mining for coal, the topsoil in the area is removed and stored. After mining operations are completed, the land is leveled and topsoil is replaced. The purpose of replacing topsoil is
Which event is the best example of competition between species in a pond environment?
What is the most likely effect of a drought on a population of frogs that live in a shallow swamp?
The following waste materials are buried in a landfill. Which will break down most quickly?
What is the source of genetic information of offspring produced by sexual reproduction?
Why do multicellular organisms need transport systems?
Scientists frequently monitor levels of microorganisms at beaches in the summer time. High temperatures, pollution, runoff, and illegal dumping all affect water quality. What do these scientific efforts illustrate?
Machines are often full of moving parts that rub against each other. In machines, a lubricant such as oil is often applied to these moving parts. Why is this oil necessary?
The manufacturing process used to permanently put parts together is called
Solids, liquids, and gases are all different states of which of the following?
Animals respond to environmental stimuli obtained through their sensory organs. How does the body convert information from the environment to an internal response?
Which is a primary energy source used by power plants to generate electricity?
Perry studies the ways in which animals are adapted for survival. Which is a behavioral adaptation that helps the organism to survive?
A helium-filled balloon is released into the atmosphere. As the balloon rises, which would most likely increase and cause the balloon to burst?
Which of the following is composed of many cells?
As a result of human activity, many lakes in Florida have increased levels of nutrients that support algal growth. These algae grow very rapidly, then die and decompose. What impact does this overgrowth of algae most likely have on the lake ecosystem?
The color of which animal allows it to blend into its environment?
In the Adirondack forests of New York, some trees have died. The change in the forest is thought to be related to air pollution and rain. Which abiotic factor most likely has been changed as a result of the pollution and rain which resulted in the death of the trees?
The Sun is classified as
Which material is attracted to a magnet?
What are the building blocks of all matter?
Mrs. Henry's class studied the arrangement of planets in the solar system. Which planets are closest to each other?
The primary role of the endocrine system is to
What happens when an animal hibernates?
The invention of the microscope was important to the advancement of science. Many other discoveries were only possible with the help of the microscope. The microscope was used to make which discovery?
A galaxy is best described as a cluster of
A student in science class finds an unlabeled bottle containing a liquid. For safety purposes the student should
A scientist discovered a way to turn plant material into fuel. This more cleanly burning fuel can be used in cars. How do people most likely benefit from turning plant material into fuel?
Sunlight is able to penetrate the top several meters of marine water, where most plant and animal life exists. Which of these systems are interacting in this description?
A male puppy inherits traits from
Fossil fuels were made from specific kinds of ancient organisms. The fossilized remains of tiny ocean organisms formed
In the water cycle, where does water go after reaching the ocean?
Mountain bike tires have large, knob-like treads. These tires are useful on steep slopes because they
A student plans to write a report about a type of bird that includes only facts. Which statement should the student leave out of the report?
Over a long time, oil can form when layers of sediment push down on decomposing
A biological community is made up of all the
Which temperature and moisture conditions describe an air mass that originates over the Atlantic Ocean near the equator?
The parts of plants that make seeds are the
Fossil fuels were formed from
Over time, iron becomes rust when it combines with water and oxygen. Which type of change must occur for rust to form?
When a bottle of strong perfume is opened at the front of a classroom, the smell gradually spreads throughout the entire room. Which process explains this occurrence?
A student is trying to model an ocean environment. What is the most important factor the student should add to the aquarium in order to make sure that the model is accurate?
Students measured how long it took for an ice cube to melt. Which measurement best represents how long it took for the ice cube to melt?
Rocks are classified as sedimentary, metamorphic, or igneous on the basis of the
Which basic units of matter have the same properties as an element?
Some jet airplanes fly in a layer of the atmosphere where temperature generally increases with altitude. What is this layer of the atmosphere?
One unique characteristic of water is that its specific heat
An earthquake occurs in western Nevada. What most likely causes the earthquake?
A scientist puts more food than a lab rat can eat in each of 100 cages containing lab rats. She surveys the mass of food each rat eats in one day. To determine the difference between the largest and smallest masses of food eaten, she should find her data's
Which of these is defined as "the passage of genetic instructions from one generation to the next?"
What is the primary source of stored thermal energy in oceans?
Two empty metal cans, one black and one white, were placed outside on a hot day. Both cans were the same size and were left in the Sun for 3 hours. Compared to the white can, the black can would most likely be
Oil and gas are two sources of energy used in America. Which is the main reason oil and gas may be replaced with other sources of energy in the future?
Which of these are parts of the geologic process that changes metamorphic rock into sedimentary rock?
In a forest, a brown-colored bird sits on a tree branch. How does the bird's brown color most likely help it survive in the forest?
Rock layers with sand-sized particles were most likely deposited by
The living systems of plants and animals are constantly taking in water to continue the processes of life. What eventually happens to most of that water?
MOST of the volcanoes that make up the "Ring of Fire" were formed near
Which is not considered an instrument to be used to determine weather?
Which natural process is responsible for the formation of the Mississippi Delta?
Neon (Ne), argon (Ar), and krypton (Kr) are in the same column on the Periodic Table of the Elements. What characteristic do these elements have in common?
Screech owls nest in holes in trees. They eat mice and crickets. Where would a screech owl most likely live?
Carlos was playing on a slide on a sunny summer day. Which property of the slide tells Carlos how much energy the slide absorbed from the Sun?
Which equation summarizes the process of respiration?
When a baker bakes bread, he prepares the dough by mixing 2 cups of flour with 1 cup of water. The water needs to be 85°F. Which tools are best for the baker to measure both the volume and temperature of the water?
What form of energy makes a compass needle point north?
Which process in the water cycle is directly caused by the heat from the Sun?
Which tool is used to observe the cell wall of a leaf?
Which material best conducts electricity?
In 1922 N. L. Bowen developed the concept of magmatic evolution which is also known as Bowen's Reaction Series. Applying the Bowen's Series principles, what mineral forms and crystallizes first in the region of highest temperature and pressure?
A cyclist travels 3 km north in 25 minutes. What does this information describe?
Which of these occurs when the North Pole is tilted toward the Sun and the United States has the most daylight hours of the year?
A ball rolls across the floor and slows down to a stop. Which force caused the ball to slow down?
Which energy source might involve burning wood or producing gasohol?
A marine iguana is an animal that lives on the shoreline of warm islands. Its tail is long and thick. Which of these is improved by the shape of its tail?
Leslie's science teacher told her she must take a flexible approach to solving problems. What did Leslie's teacher most likely mean?
What would happen if a magnet was placed in the center of a plastic bowl containing a mixture of iron filings and sand?
Which property of an object is identified using the sense of smell?
Hector's class is counting the number of ducks in a pond. Hector counts a different number than the rest of the class. Which of the following actions should Hector most likely perform?
Which property of sugar remains after sugar is dissolved in water?
Which substance is composed of only one type of atom?
Over a two-week period, several students complain of feeling sick. Their symptoms include a cough, fever, and a sore throat. What describes the most likely cause of these symptoms?
The Appalachian Mountains, which extend from Canada to Alabama, were much taller in the past than they are today. Which of the following two processes are most responsible for the decrease in the height of the Appalachian Mountains?
Which organisms break down and recycle dead plants and animals?
Which is not a significant reason why people are living longer today than 100 years ago?
Joann repeatedly overfed the fish in the pond behind her house. The nitrates from the excess food contributed to an overgrowth of algae. To correct the problem, Joann added more plants to the pond. How will adding more plants help?
The engineering team that is designing a scientific research station on the Arctic permafrost has to provide the station with energy for cooking, heating, and lighting. Considering the fragile environment and other conditions there, the best choice is probably to
A student walks to school each morning in Maine. It is dark outside when he begins walking. As the days pass, the student notices the mornings are becoming brighter. The Sun is rising earlier each day. He also notices that there is more daylight after school. The Sun is setting later in the day. Which change of seasons is occurring?
Where did organisms live when they first appeared on Earth?
Which of the following will always produce a magnetic force on a nearby iron nail?
Which of these items is designed to produce heat from electricity?
A student records the temperature in the schoolyard every day for a month. Which is the best way to present the temperature data so each day can be compared?
At approximately which time of day is the Sun at the highest point in the sky to an observer in New York State?
When one form of energy is converted into other forms of energy, the total amount of energy
To study the effect of heat on plant growth, Andy divided ten identical seedlings into groups. She placed one group on a windowsill in the sun and the other group in a dark closet on the cool (north) side of the house. Think about the characteristics of a properly designed scientific experiment. What is wrong with the above experiment?
Which of these groups would be most concerned with technological developments in insect control?
A model of Earth would be different from a model of the Moon because the Moon model would be
A student sees a bird at a feeder. The student identifies the bird as a sparrow. Which organ system did the student use to identify the bird?
Which tool is the best to use when studying small organisms not visible to the eye?
Which would most likely cause a decrease in the number of woodpeckers in an ecosystem?
Which is not a characteristic common to organisms?
Which calculation is used to determine acceleration?
Dogs have some learned behaviors. Which is most likely a learned behavior in a dog?
Some wasp species lay their eggs inside living caterpillars. As the eggs mature, they use the caterpillar as a food resource. Eventually, the wasp larvae hatch out of the caterpillar. This type of relationship is best described as
Which is the best action to help protect water resources in Virginia?
The Moon's rotation is
Which process involves choosing certain organisms to reproduce with one another in order to pass on specific, desirable traits to their offspring?
During which process are nuclei duplicated?
In a turtle race, each turtle walks one a 3-meter track. If the turtles walk one at a time, how can you tell which turtle was fastest?
Which organism is a decomposer?
Parents with freckles often have children with freckles. This occurs because
Two fossils of the same species were found on two different continents. The continents are separated by the Atlantic Ocean. Scientists dated the fossils to be 2 million years old. Which is the least likely explanation for these findings?
Students visited a garden to observe hummingbirds. They wanted to find out if hummingbirds were more likely to visit colored flowers or white flowers. Which should the students do first for this investigation?
What is the name of the author who proposed natural selection as the mechanism of evolution?
Which pair of terms describes the usual location for fertilization and the first stages of development in human reproduction?
In the rock cycle an igneous rock forms from
Mars is an inner planet and Jupiter is an outer planet. Which best describes the relationship between the two planets?
In order for electricity from a battery to power a light bulb, the wire has to provide the electricity a path to do what?
Many cities encourage people to recycle. The items that can be recycled are placed in a special container and picked up each week from people's homes. How does recycling most likely help the environment?
When coal burns, the reaction
Scientists have discovered that there has been a reduction in the butterfly population in an ecosystem. After much research, they have identified that the carrying capacity for butterflies has been decreased. If the scientists want to increase the butterfly population, which action should they recommend?
Which do meteorologists use to measure the amount of precipitation that falls during a storm?
Which terms are both used to describe the weather?
Which of these has been controlled in an attempt to reduce the depletion of ozone in Earth's atmosphere?
Today's limestone caverns were once solid rock. Acidic rainwater seeping through the rock over hundreds of years dissolved part of the rock, forming caverns. This is an example of
Which of the following contains most of the water on Earth?
Which substance do all living things require to survive?
A student plans to measure the thermal expansion of a strip of metal as it is heated from 0ºC to 50ºC. Which piece of equipment should he use to measure the expansion?
Which of these was used by Alfred Wegener as evidence that Earth's continental landmasses had drifted apart over time?
The driver of a car at a railroad crossing hears a change in pitch of the train whistle as the train passes by. This change in pitch is most likely due to
Which is an example of a hypothesis?
Which would be considered an inexhaustible resource?
Which factor causes surface ocean currents?
Marta has a radio in her room. It requires electricity in order to play. Which of the following is necessary in order for electricity to move from the source to the radio?
Having dry, hot weather for a long time can cause a
What is the primary function of white blood cells in humans?
Which trait most likely helps an animal survive in a very cold environment?
Which is most likely a genetic adaptation of desert plants to survive the hot, dry climate conditions?
Charles Darwin made a number of observations and inferences during his travels. He studied island finches during a long period of time. Which statement is an inference?
A student mixes salt and water in a beaker to form a solution. What properties of the substances would allow the student to then separate the components?
In a lab investigation, students had to identify different mineral specimens. Which property is the most reliable for identifying one mineral from another?
Which of these revolves around a planet?
A scientist wants to collect several bird eggs on an island. She needs a case that will protect the eggs she collects. Which of the following cases would best protect the eggs?
Which process is a cause of variation in a species?
The leaves of a tree change color in the fall. This is an example of a tree
A dog growls when a predator gets close. Growling is an example of which animal behavior?
In what respect are protons and electrons always equal?
How does the Sun help move water from the ocean through the water cycle?
What would a model of the Sun, Earth, and Moon best help students visualize?
How are bacterial cells and human cells alike?
The Moon's surface is visible to an observer on Earth because the Moon
Why do trees like oaks and walnuts depend upon squirrels?
When an atom gains an electron, the atom will
A paramecium is an example of
A sea anemone uses poisonous darts to
Rivers and streams can carry sediments long distances before they are deposited. What is formed when sediments are deposited at the mouth of a river?
Steel is used for cables in suspension bridges because of its capacity for
In which layer of the atmosphere does most of Earth's weather occur?
When light is reflected off an object and enters the eye, it falls on the
The skin, lungs, and kidneys work together to
Which type of matter can be separated by physical means?
Which plant part is described correctly?
Which process causes sand grains to stick together to form sandstone?
Plants store energy in what form?
A student placed a rock in a graduated cylinder containing water, causing the water level in the cylinder to increase by 20 mL. This increase represents the rock's
Researchers are investigating whether dinosaurs were endothermic like birds. Which evidence from the fossil record could be effectively compared with modern day evidence to support this hypothesis?
A student pushes a box to slide it across the floor. Which statement explains why the box begins to move?
Which article might appear in a scientific magazine?
A train travels at a rate of 13 meters per second (m/s). Over the next 60 seconds, the speed of the train increases to speed to 22 m/s. What is the average rate of acceleration of the train?
Which trait is common in gases that contribute to Earth's greenhouse effect?
George is studying erosion. He learns how rocks break apart over time. Which of these most likely forms when a rock weathers and breaks into small pieces?
As wave frequency is increased, wave energy
A student is pouring equal amounts of water, maple syrup, and cooking oil into a glass beaker and looking at how the layers settle. Which property of the liquids is the student most likely comparing?
Betsy tries to attract a variety of birds to her backyard. She puts up a bird feeder that contains sunflower seeds and corn. Which term best describes the contents of the bird feeder?
Which best describes construction technology?
What eventually happens to a species when the environment changes and the organisms do not adapt?
Similar types of cells form tissues. What is the next level of complexity formed from the grouping of tissues?
Which form of energy is produced when a rubber band vibrates?
Which discovery was necessary before radio could be invented?
Which statement would most likely be included in a news report about an approaching hurricane?
The energy produced by a burner on a gas stove is primarily
Students compare two different rocks. The rocks are both bright and spotted. Which property are the students most likely observing?
Which of the following makes up the smallest region in the electromagnetic spectrum?
In a northern state, a room used for growing plants is not allowing enough light to enter for healthy plant growth. Adding windows in walls facing which direction would best solve this problem?
A student finds a bottle that is labeled with a long chemical name. What is the best way for the student to learn more about the chemical properties of this substance?
The length of a year on Earth is a little over 365 days. The length of a year on a planet is best described as the time it takes for which to occur?
The human body has different levels of organization. In the structural organization of the central nervous system, which is an organ?
Increased human populations can lead to the depletion of locally available resources within communities. Compared to other communities, which of these locally available resources is most likely to be depleted in desert communities?
A hot pack is a product that releases heat when chemicals inside of it interact. What is taking place inside an active hot pack?
Respiration is a process during which energy is released from glucose. This energy is used for processes such as growth of the body. Which type of energy does respiration release?
An organism that breaks down dead plants and animals, returning matter back into the soil, is called a
What type of cell passes on mutations?
Which population would be harmed first by a long period of drought?
The house cat was believed to be tamed in ancient Egypt. In 2004, the remains of an eight-month old cat buried with its owner were discovered on the Mediterranean island of Cyprus. The date of burial, however, came before Egyptian civilization. Which best explains the importance of the discovery?
Which activity requires the use of safety goggles to protect the eyes?
The most common source of nonrenewable resources used to generate electricity in the state of Nevada is
A "light year" refers to
All animals need air to survive. An insect gets air through tiny holes on the sides of its body. A whale breathes through a blow hole. What body part do fish use to breathe?
Which of the following tools would be most useful in determining the length and width of a school cafeteria?
The extensive branching of neurons helps them to perform which function?
Which of the following are narrow belts of strong winds found in the upper troposphere?
A hiker wants to know if air is warmer in a forest than in the nearby farm field. Which activity would best help the hiker find out which area is warmer?
Recently the telephone company announced the implementation of a new telephone area code for Massachusetts. What technological changes are responsible for the need for a new area code?
Which of the following is a benefit of using radiation as a medical treatment?
Which of these statements best describes temperature as elevation in the atmosphere increases?
The transfer of heat in the atmosphere by winds that circulate between the equator and the poles is an example of
Which is most responsible for the uneven heating of the air in the atmosphere?
Three gases found in Earth's atmosphere are carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and oxygen. What is their order of abundance from greatest to least?
Copper, silver, and nickel are all classified as
The body is made up of many systems that interact with one another. For example, the skeletal system and the muscular system work together to help the body move. Which system works with the respiratory system to distribute oxygen to the body?
Sediment that is deposited on a beach may come from a local source or be transported by which action?
Sonar can be used to measure distances underwater. This is accomplished by sending a sound wave to a "target" while measuring the total time it takes for the wave to reach the target and then return to its source. Which of the following sound wave characteristics must be known when using sonar to measure distances?
What major events cause islands to form in the Pacific Ocean?
Fossil fuels are common sources of energy. What type of pollution is most often associated with burning fossil fuels?
A boy and his sister both play piano. Playing piano is an example of
Which is the best way to generate an electrical current in a coil of wire?
What property of water best helps aquatic life survive in lakes during the winter?
Which part of a plant helps the plant make food from sunlight?
Which of the following is the main reason water at the surface of the ocean is warmer than water at the bottom of the ocean?
A student finds an animal in the wild. He decides it is a bird because it has
Many scientists accept the theory that excess emission of carbon dioxide from cars and industry causes a layer of gas in the upper atmosphere that traps heat. This, in turn, causes the average temperature on Earth to rise. Which of the following observations supports that theory?
Why is it important to protect soil?
Fungi recycle leaves in forests. Fungi release chemicals onto the leaves to break them down into smaller particles. The fungi use the small particles for growth. Which process allows fungi to obtain the nutrients they need from dead leaves?
Sandstone and all other types of sedimentary rock are made up of particles. The source materials of these particles consist of
A tree uses gas A to produce gas B. An animal uses gas B to produce gas A. What is gas B in this cycle?
Which of the following is produced when two or more elements combine in a chemical reaction?
A research team has made new discoveries about magnetism. Which of these statements best describes the value to society of publishing their discoveries?
Which object in the sky is a satellite of the planet Earth?
Which statement describes a property of water that most likely causes large rocks to break apart?
Which of these provides the best evidence that an environmental change has occurred?
An ice cube is put into a heated pan. What will most likely happen to the molecules in the ice as the ice is heated?
Dr. Mendez specializes in patients who have osteoarthritis. His patients often complain of pain and swelling due to loss of cartilage. Which system is most affected by this disease?
During the construction of a new building, workers dug round holes in the ground and filled the holes with steel and concrete. Which of the following parts of the building was being built during this stage of construction?
Centuries ago, people used their knowledge of the stars to
Which of these is the BEST way to save animals and trees?
From what source does almost all heat energy on Earth come?
Overgrazing of land by livestock contributes to a major problem. That problem is
Which tool would be most useful in studying the living organisms the students collected from the pond?
Which is the Sun most likely to become toward the end of its lifetime?
Acid rain is the result of pollutants being released into the
The job of the bladder in an animal is to store wastes. Which organ in an animal removes wastes from the blood?
Animals get the energy they need for growth and repair by
Which of these cell types has DNA that is not bound in a nuclear membrane?
In humans, digestion begins in the mouth. The complete process of digestion occurs with the help of many different parts of the body. Which term best identifies the parts of the body that carry out the function of digestion?
Anita heats a beaker containing water. As the temperature of the water increases, which change to the water molecules occurs?
Which of the following are likely to do the most damage to ecosystems along the Rio Grande River?
Which process is responsible for the growth and repair of human tissue?
Which sequence represents the correct levels of organization for multicellular organisms?
Convection currents in the mantle are thought to be the driving force behind tectonic movement. At which location do the convection currents cause the plates to diverge?
A class made a solar cooker out of a large can. What color should they paint the can in order to collect the most heat?
Ann makes hats for people. She has each person select the fabric and a hat style before she makes the hat to fit the person's head size. Which type of manufacturing system is Ann most likely using to make hats?
What information would be most helpful to a person with allergies when selecting food products?
Which event takes about one year to complete?
Which planet is fourth from the Sun in our solar system?
What force causes objects to be pulled toward Earth?
What do the long vine of an ivy plant and the trunk of an oak tree have in common?
Students wanted to see if the growth of a plant was affected by using four different types of soil. How should the students best carry out this investigation after potting the plants in the four different types of soil?
In the 16005 Robert Hooke invented an improved type of microscope. Which of these was a direct result of this invention?
The number of neutrons in an atom is found by subtracting
As the distance between a magnet and a metal paper clip increases, the force of attraction between them
Nutrients enter the bloodstream during the process of
Which set of elements have chemical properties similar to those of phosphorus?
Tides occur in the oceans at regular times every day because of
What is the name of the process in the water cycle shown by label 1?
What force pulls things towards the center of Earth?
Earth can be viewed as an engine and heat exchange is part of the engine system. Which would be an example of a transfer of energy from the atmosphere to the lithosphere?
All energy resources have benefits, risks, and drawbacks. Which two resources present the most dangerous risks and consequences for the environment during their acquisition?
A puppy has traits from its mother and its father. Which of these structures provides genetic information from the father to the puppy?
A scientist performs an experiment which suggests a new explanation for the digestion of certain proteins in humans. These results should first be communicated to the scientific community by which means?
Juan noticed that sunny skies suddenly became stormy. Which most likely happened when the weather changed in this way?
Which process causes water to move from the ocean to the atmosphere during the formation of a hurricane?
A student places a chemical in an insulated container and measures the temperature. A second chemical is added and the container is sealed and the temperature is monitored. What is the student trying to determine?
Which is an example of asexual reproduction?
The sum of all chemical reactions that take place within an organism is known as
The appearance of the Moon as observed from Earth changes over time because of the Moon's
The basic life functions of an organism are carried on by
What keeps stars such as the Sun from collapsing from their own self-gravity?
The increasing use of internal combustion engines could eventually deplete which resource?
If the results of an experiment do not support the hypothesis, the scientist will most likely do all of the following except
Which has the longest wavelength?
Which statement best describes how birth and death rates compare in a population at carrying capacity?
Your community is planning to build a new sanitary landfill. In locating the landfill, which is the most important environmental consideration?
Which is the best conductor of electricity?
Students compared the growth rate of the roots of basil plants in three different water solutions. Measurements were recorded every other day for eight weeks. Which unit of measure is most appropriate for this investigation?
When placed in a container at room temperature, which substance has a definite volume but takes the shape of the container?
Elements on the right side of the periodic table differ from the elements on the left side in that the elements on the right side
Astronomers have found low-energy background radiation in every part of the sky that they have studied. This radiation is taken as evidence of energy remaining from which event?
A class is studying how gravity affects objects in motion. Which tool would best measure the distance an object travels after it is thrown?
If the Earth did not tilt on its axis in relation to the sun, which of the following would also be true?
In the 20th century, Edwin Hubble deduced from observations that there are galaxies other than the Milky Way. Hubble's observations depended on improvements in a technology first developed by which scientist?
What is one of the major advantages of using hydroelectric power?
What is the difference between magma and lava?
Scientists today understand how forces work due to Isaac Newton's study of
On a day in early spring, the number of hours of daylight and of night are about the same. From sunrise to sunset on a spring day, Earth has
A marsh in your neighborhood dried up during a long, hot summer. This is most likely to cause which of the following changes in the neighborhood?
In an effort to preserve wildlife on his farm in Massachusetts, a farmer decides to stop using a 10-acre field. The farmer fences off the area, stops cutting the grass, and stops allowing livestock to graze on it. After twenty years, the area would most likely
Penny's class was learning how rapidly some changes can happen on Earth. Which event causes the fastest change to the surface of Earth?
Air that travels away from the equator fails to maintain a straight path. The path of the air is deflected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The apparent deflection of air to either the right or left is known as the Coriolis Effect. Which factor produces the Coriolis Effect?
When coal is burned to produce electricity, the electrical energy produced is less than the potential energy in the coal. Which best explains this observation?
When a person's arm touches something hot, the muscles in the arm react to pull the arm away. Which body system alerts the muscles to react?
Two chemicals are mixed in a test tube and a chemical reaction takes place. If this reaction is endothermic and the test tube is touched, which of the following best describes what is felt?
The width of a pencil lead is most accurately measured in
Which organism is able to work together with other cells of its species?
Which of the following items is necessary in a laboratory for safety purposes?
Which type of energy is carried through a metal cable?
Glaciers cover about 10% of the total land area on Earth. The role of glaciers in the water cycle is to
The density of a material can be measured by using a
Which of the following describes diffraction?
What is one way in which workplace automation can have a negative effect on society?
Which layer of the atmosphere contains about 75% of the gasses and almost all of the water vapor?
India was once its own continent. According to the theory of continental drift, India has collided with and become part of the continent of Asia. This caused
Why are many desert animals more active at night?
If the Earth rotated in the opposite direction, what would most likely occur?
A student uses a fan and a box of sand to model the formation of sand dunes. This model shows the effect of which natural factor on the landscape?
Evan is performing an investigation. Before conducting his investigation, what must Evan do?
When a skydiver jumps from a plane, the open parachute will increase the air resistance by
If you took all of the atoms out of a chair, what would be left?
Which of these is the center of our solar system?
Which of these best describes the Moon?
The color of a star indicates its
Which type of organism helps return nutrients from dead plants and animals to the soil?
When mining for coal, a mining company removes the plants and layers of soil and rock above the coal deposit, and takes the coal. When the operation is complete, the mining company returns soil and rock, covers it with a layer of topsoil, and plants trees and grass. The trees and grass help to
A model of an atom includes red marbles for electrons, green marbles for protons, and blue marbles for neutrons. All marbles have a radius of 2 cm. How could the model be changed to represent more properties of an atom?
The smallest particle of matter that can be identified as an element is called
How are the life cycles of a ladybug and a frog similar?
The empty spaces in a material are called pores. Porosity is the amount of empty space within a material. Permeability describes how well the pores in a material are connected. Which of these materials would make the most effective aquifer?
Why do we see different stars in the sky at different times of the year?
Which of these will most likely occur if chemicals from fertilizers run off into lakes and streams?
A student identifies a soil sample as "very gritty." What characteristic of the soil did the student describe?
When a tree is dormant, the tree is
The charge of the nucleus of an atom is due to the presence of
Earth's hydrosphere is a layer of
Riding a bicycle produces several forms of energy. Which form of energy is produced in the greatest amount by pedaling a bicycle down the sidewalk?
Which part of a dandelion plant takes in minerals and water?
Many natural resources are found in Maryland and the surrounding area. Some of these natural resources are renewable and some are nonrenewable. People use both kinds of resources in daily activities. Using natural resources often produces waste products. Which of these natural resources found in Maryland is nonrenewable?
Which surgery is most like the way a transgenic organism is made?
Use the information to answer the question. Over the last 150 years, the use of fossil fuels has increased, resulting in more carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some scientists think that these atmospheric gases will result in global warming. Scientists have recorded data on global temperature changes and have predicted possible changes in sea level that may affect Maryland residents. Using fossil fuels in the United States will most likely contribute to rising sea levels globally by
Clouds are formed from tiny drops of water that are light enough to float in the air. As these drops bump into each other, they form larger drops. What happens when these drops become too heavy to float in the air?
The shape of a riverbed changes over time as a result of which gradual process?
Which statement explains why daylight and darkness occur on Earth?
Which force causes a soccer ball to fall to the ground after it has been kicked up in the air?
Which event will occur in an area after a major flood?
What type of force keeps the planets orbiting the Sun?
Which gas could cause a glowing splint to burst into flame?
Dr. Wagner is investigating a newly discovered, disease-causing agent. She determines that one structure in the agent is double-stranded RNA. What kind of agent is Dr. Wagner studying?
Which activity is an important function of nucleases?
Which best explains why it is important for a doctor's office to keep accurate records of the medicines prescribed for their patients?
When light hits a mirror, most of the light is
A plant scientist is developing a new fertilizer called Hypergrow. She designs an experiment to test whether Hypergrow helps plants grow faster than Supergrow, a fertilizer already on the market. Which of the following should the scientist do with light during the experiment?
The boiling point of water in degrees Celsius is
A student sorted mineral samples into two groups: dull and shiny. Which of the following properties did the student use to sort the mineral samples into groups?
A 13-year-old boy has blue eyes. Which statement concerning his eye color is correct?
Radioactive waste from nuclear power plants is sealed in containers and deeply buried in the ground. Sealing and burying waste reduces the chances that water will become contaminated. At which point in the water cycle would radioactive contamination most likely be found?
The early Greeks are credited with many valid concepts in astronomy. Some of their theories were correct; some were later proven incorrect. One theory was that Earth was the center of the universe and that other planets circled Earth. The Greeks thought Earth did not move because its movement was not obvious from the surface of the planet. The Greeks also believed that an invisible sphere surrounding our planet contained the stars. This sphere rotated, explaining the apparent movement of constellations over time. Early Greeks also developed theories about the relationship between the moon and Earth. Why is the same side of the moon always visible from Earth?
Sodium chloride (NaCl) is formed in a chemical reaction between sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl_{2}). What is sodium chloride?
Which group of organisms is most responsible for changing the composition of Earth's early atmosphere?
A litter of kittens have traits that are similar to both the mother cat and the father cat. Which best explains this situation?
Jessica is making fruit punch for her friends. She pours the powder into a container with sugar and water. Which of these best describes what happens to the sugar?
The motion of atoms and molecules in a substance is
Which features form when magma emerges between two diverging oceanic plates?
Research has shown that specialization of stem cells into specific cell types results, in part, from cell shape. What provides a specialized cell with its shape?
Nicole is learning about the characteristics of different vertebrates. Which is a common characteristic of mammals?
Which two processes are common to all living things?
Acid rain can damage limestone buildings and marble statues. It can also harm organisms living in ponds and other ecosystems. Which pollutant in the atmosphere causes most of the acid rain?
Ospreys are birds that eat fish. Where would an osprey most likely live?
Which of these best describes wind energy?
Euglena is a single-celled photosynthetic organism. Clover is a multicellular green plant. Which of the following activities is carried out by both euglena and clover?
A glass of ice water is placed on a table. After 10 minutes, there are drops of water on the outside surface of the glass. Which change in phase caused the drops of water?
The list below gives some symptoms of people with the common cold. Symptoms of the Common Cold stuffy nose low fever sore throat cough Which body system is most affected by the common cold?
The formation of the Grand Canyon has most likely taken how long?
Which health condition is an infectious disease?
Which statement describes a characteristic of both sexual and asexual reproduction?
Which activity is most likely to add pollutants to the environment?
Which is the best example of a parasitic relationship?
What is a benefit of using technology, such as robotics, in manufacturing?
Warm air masses that rise over Earth's equator move north or south. This movement is primarily the result of which of the following processes?
A new moon occurs about every
Which statement is true?
A leaf is covered in mud during a landslide. After one million years, this leaf will most likely be ___.
A certain snake species in an ecosystem eats small rodents. If a bird species is introduced into the ecosystem that also eats small rodents, which of these will most likely increase?
Which characteristic would a scientist most likely maintain throughout an investigation?
Plant cells use special parts to capture sunlight. The parts use the sunlight to make food. Where will you find the most of these parts in a plant?
Which is the best example of something that has kinetic energy?
Corals are small marine organisms that live in groups and make hard outer skeletons to protect their bodies. Over time, these outer skeletons can build up to make large coral reefs. Which of the following statements best describes one way the formation of a coral reef changes the ocean ecosystem?
A magnet and a metal paper clip have the strongest magnetic attraction when the distance between them is
High average daily temperature and heavy annual precipitation are found in a
Computers have devices called heat sinks designed to lower the temperature of a computer by scattering produced heat into the surrounding area. Which type of energy is kept away from a computer by a heat sink?
In the first step of making some ceramic cups, the following manufacturing process is used. Liquid clay is poured into a mold, allowed to solidify, then removed from the mold. What is the name of this manufacturing process?
The first telescopes were invented hundreds of years ago. Which was discovered as a result of this invention?
Which of these best demonstrates the characteristics of science?
Which type of tissue functions to move the bones?
What process in the atmosphere protects people from the ultraviolet rays in sunlight?
Which statement best describes a bacterial cell?
Visible light in the electromagnetic spectrum
Which of the following is the best example of a part of the propulsion system of a tractor?
A homeowner wants to use a renewable source of energy to heat the home. Which of these would be the best to use?
How do sprouting plants exhibit positive gravitropism?
A student picked up a small rock using a magnet. The rock probably contained
Grasses, shrubs, and trees are called producers because they make
How does the buying and selling of a popular species of rainforest animal as pets have a negative effect on the rainforest ecosystem?
Plants that can live in sandy soils most likely have the ability to withstand
Which characteristic of an element determines its placement in the periodic table?
Approximately what percentage of the electromagnetic spectrum is visible light?
Two boxes, A and B, both contain the same number of nitrogen gas molecules. The gas molecules in box A have twice the average speed of the molecules in box B. Which of the following best describes the nitrogen gas in box A?
People use many tools to help measure changes. Which person is measuring a change?
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infects the cells that coordinate the human immune response. When these cells are killed or compromised, the body cannot effectively protect itself from infection. Which cells does HIV infect?
Which trait can children inherit from their parents?
Which tool would be best for students to use to observe and measure plant cells?
For a plant to stay alive indoors, where does it need to be placed?
Which type of adaptation allows an animal to deceive its predator?
Which occurs as a result of the rotation of Earth about its own axis?
Theresa studied different forms of energy. Which is the best way of expressing the amount of mechanical energy exerted by a force?
The water cycle includes which processes?
Which plant is grown for food?
Which cell function is most directly dependent on the cytoskeleton?
When birds fly south for the winter, they are exhibiting
When a plane flies, it travels through air that contains gases, liquids, and solids. This area is best described as the
How would the woodpecker population in a forest area most likely be affected if a housing development is built in that area?
Where is water most likely to be brackish?
The amount of elements heavier than hydrogen is constantly increasing in the universe. Which best identifies the bodies in which this change is taking place?
The discovery of a fossilized animal with teeth, a long bony tail, and feathered wings helped to establish which evolutionary sequence?
What does the mechanical energy of a system include?
On a class field trip, Zach took a walk through the woods using his senses. Zach made observations on the different sights, smells, and sounds in the woods. What system transferred the observations from his senses to his brain?
Louis was investigating physical and chemical changes in matter. Which of these changes that Louis found involves a chemical change in matter?
A ball is thrown up into the air. Which force causes the ball to fall to the ground?
An octopus releases black ink into the water when feeling threatened. What does this most likely help an octopus do?
Which method would be best for scientists to use to determine the absolute age of a Precambrian igneous rock?
A mouse's rate of carbon dioxide output increased. Which of the following most likely happened?
Deer are plants-eaters. A winter storm kills many of the plants deer eat. The storm will most likely result in the deer
Students measured the elevation changes in a large park near their school. Which of the following would be the best way to report their findings?
Which of the following is the best example of a wave?
Louisa needs to demonstrate a solution to her class. Which is the best example of a solution?
Which action would most likely reduce air pollution caused by cars?
How is a telephone able to transmit sound?
Which cellular structure in an animal cell helps maintain homeostasis by controlling the transportation of substances into and out of the cell?
Which of the following was invented by Benjamin Franklin?
The engine of an automobile is part of which type of system?
Which event most likely takes place as the result of crustal movement along transform boundaries?
The function of a plant's roots is to take in
The theory of plate tectonics provides the current explanation for the way in which
An organism eats grass and is preyed upon by a carnivore. Which categories describe this organism?
Which substance is necessary for burning to take place?
Moths undergo complete metamorphosis. Which stages does a moth's life cycle include?
In humans, a V-shaped hairline is dominant over a straight hairline. If one parent is homozygous for a V-shaped hairline ( HH ) while the other parent is homozygous for a straight hairline ( hh ), what is the probability that the offspring of these parents will have a straight hairline?
Where would electrons most likely be located in an atom?
Spring tides occur during which lunar phases?
A magnet can generate an electric current in a wire if the magnet is close enough to the wire and if the magnet is also
Which of the following symbiotic relationships is considered parasitic?
What will most likely affect your adult height?
The winter solstice occurs on either December 21 or 22, depending on the year. Which of the following statements best explains why the time of the year the winter solstice occurs has the least amount of daylight in Massachusetts?
Maryland has many renewable and nonrenewable natural resources. Which group contains only renewable resources found in Maryland?
Which part makes a plant cell different from an animal cell?
Which of the following has a warmer average surface temperature than Earth?
Sound waves are not able to travel through
Scientists study fossils to learn about extinct plants and animals. Which of these is the best example of a fossil?
When an egg and sperm form an embryo, the offspring that is formed will have genetic traits that are
Turgor pressure in the cells of plant roots is strong enough to eventually crack the rocks in which they grow. What machine redirects force this way?
Daphnee is going to build a model of the solar system for her science project. She decides that a meter (m) will represent one astronomical unit (AU) in her model. Based on this scale, how far away from the Sun would she need to place Earth?
A lizard in a desert sits on a warm rock. Where does the heat energy in the rock come from?
What is the major cause of ocean waves?
What type of graph would be best for recording plant growth over a one-week period?
A scientist compares ancient animal tracks to modern animal tracks. Which conclusion is the scientist most likely to reach?
A group of citizens want to have a statue built out of marble. They want to place it in a climate that has a slow rate of chemical weathering. In which type of climate would it be best to place the statue for the slowest rate of chemical weathering?
According to scientists, donkeys and horses share a common ancestor. Which evidence shows that the two organisms are related?
Which relationship is mutualistic?
In humans, B is the allele for brown eyes and b is the allele for blue eyes. Two brothers both have brown eyes, but one of them has both the B and b alleles while the other only has B alleles. Which statement is true about the brothers?
Which of the following is broken down in the body to release energy?
Which property is thought to characterize objects in the Oort Cloud?
Sound travels as a
Astronomers have been studying objects that are very bright and appear to be very far away. They have since concluded that these objects are distant galaxies with giant black holes at their center known as
Which unit of measurement should be used to describe the  mass of an apple?
Scientists have created trains that use magnets to make the trains float above the tracks as they travel. These trains float because
One role of a producer in a food chain is to provide
Tectonic motion caused tension between plates in Earth's crust. A sudden release of this energy occurred. Based on this information, which event happened?
The teacher heats a pot of water. Once the water reaches 100°C, which point has the water reached?
What is the major cause of seasonal changes?
In 1989, the unusually low snowpack in portions of the Sierra Nevada Mountains led to a widespread emergence of Edith's checkerspot butterflies in April. In these regions, flowers do not appear until May. What was the most likely result of the early emergence of these butterflies?
Which scientist developed the mathematical models used to describe the changes in the motion of objects as well as the forces that cause the change in motion?
Which natural event would take the longest time to happen?
Which property of a substance indicates whether the substance is a liquid or a solid at room temperature?
Which organelle converts glucose to energy for cellular work?
The length of a year is determined by the amount of time it takes
A tick attaches to a deer and consumes blood, harming the deer. This is an example of which type of relationship?
Cactus plants grow best in environments (habitats) that are
Where does water in a lake get most of its energy to evaporate?
A scientist trying to identify an unknown liquid may heat the liquid. Which would be the best reason for the scientist to heat the liquid?
During a laboratory investigation, a student cracks a clean, empty Erlenmeyer flask. It does not break, but it can no longer be used. Where should the flask be placed?
A light bulb transforms electrical energy into light energy. A light bulb also transforms electrical energy into
Jonas needs to split a log. He has a sledge hammer. What other tool should he also use to split the log?
Hurricanes are driven by the energy they get from ocean water. Which property of water allows it to retain the energy needed to power a hurricane?
Which organisms contribute most to the decomposition of dead organisms?
What is one difference between birds and reptiles?
The ounce, the pound, and the ton are units of
A student uses clay to construct a model of Earth. Which layer of the model should be the thinnest layer?
A scientist observes that both birds and snakes in the same ecosystem depend on the same mouse species as a food source. The relationship between the birds and the snakes is an example of
Animals get energy from the food they eat. What is the original source of this energy?
Many human activities, such as driving a car, cause the release of air pollutants. Which substance is a common air pollutant when driving a car?
Which environment would most likely have rich, fertile soil?
In 1785, James Hutton, stated that evidence of past occurrences can be used to explain events which happen today. Which could most likely be used to explain an event in the geologic past?
The elements sulfur (S) and oxygen combine to form a substance called sulfur dioxide (SO2). Sulfur dioxide is also formed when coal and oil are burned. Sulfur dioxide can best be described as
If a pond is polluted by soap that has phosphate, this pollutant will cause the algae to quickly reproduce. Which will most likely increase in the pond if this happens to the algae?
In order to carry out the functions of life, organisms must
A roller coaster is climbing up the highest hill on its track. At which point will the front car of the coaster most likely have its greatest potential energy?
What is the mass of an asteroid with a speed of 200 m/s and a momentum of 2,000 kg x m/s?
Some scientists study images of very distant celestial bodies. Where is the best location for the types of telescopes that can provide the scientists with the clearest images.
How do people get energy and nutrients?
Which action is a learned characteristic of a newborn horse?
An earthquake is caused by sudden shifts in which of the following layers of Earth?
A black bear's diet includes nuts, berries, honey, insects, and fish. Black bears are
The news often talks about how global warming could change environmental conditions on Earth. Which best explains why global warming is such a concern?
Animal cells perform functions using energy that is derived from glucose (C6H12O6). Which molecule is required for animal cells to obtain the most energy possible from a molecule of glucose?
Stomata are tiny pores located on the leaves of plants. These pores permit the exchange of gases between air in the environment and plant cells located inside the leaf. Which tissue performs a similar function in vertebrates?
When crossing parents with genotypes Rr and rr, what will be the percentages of the genotypes of the offspring?
Which information will best help scientists determine if an object is a comet, an asteroid, or a meteoroid?
In an ocean ecosystem, dead organisms such as fish and plankton sink to the bottom of the ocean. Which organisms break down and recycle the dead organisms?
Which is the best description of the brightness of the Sun?
Which process passes genetic information from plants to their offspring?
What must happen in order for scientific data to be verified through repetition?
Which particle type can be identified as being from a specific element?
Which of the following is a chemical property of a substance?
Which structure is found in a plant cell but not in an animal cell?
Which of these best describes a fossil?
A student is conducting an investigation using chemicals. Other than goggles and gloves, what else should the student use in order to conduct this investigation safely?
The boiling point of nitrogen is -196°C. What states of matter are involved when nitrogen boils?
The Hubble Space Telescope is a telescope that NASA launched into space in 1990. Scientists most likely prefer to use the Hubble Space Telescope instead of a land-based telescope because it provides better accuracy at
Which of the following statements best describes a complex machine?
A drug company developed a pill to reduce cases of stomach virus. To test the medication, half of the participants got the pill with the new medicine and half got a sugar pill. Which term best identifies the participants who got a sugar pill?
Which information does a student need to differentiate between the speed and the velocity of a vehicle in motion?
When do mutations help make an ecosystem more sustainable?
Which scientist would be most likely to study the changes in animal populations in nature?
Humans use both renewable and nonrenewable resources. Which human activity uses a nonrenewable resource?
Which best describes the motion of molecules in the gaseous state?
What is the downward movement of water through pores and other spaces in soil due to the force of gravity?
On Mount Everest the temperature decreases as the altitude increases. The summit of this mountain is in which atmospheric layer?
Which energy source is considered nonrenewable?
A renewable energy source is a source that will not run out. Which is an example of the use of such a source?
Which statement best describes why the Moon is visible from Earth?
Which statement best explains the reason that electrical wires are made of copper?
Which of these is a natural resource of Virginia?
Insulin is a chemical that is released by the endocrine system to increase the absorption of glucose by the body's cells. After which activity would insulin levels in a healthy body increase?
An engineer was given an assignment to build a model rocket. The main requirement was that it had to build it out of a metal that could release the energy that built up when reentering the atmosphere of Earth. What property should the engineer concentrate on the most when designing the rocket?
Which color of light is produced when all of the colors of visible light in the electromagnetic spectrum are combined?
A company is making prototypes for a new computer system. Which of the following statements best describes an advantage of making several different prototypes?
What is the function of the nucleus in a cell?
A tree is a renewable resource because it can be
How does the presence of organic matter contribute to good soil?
A wild turkey's forest community includes
Which of the following travels from neuron to neuron as information is transmitted?
During which process do cells use oxygen to release stored energy?
Which of the following has the ability to change the state of matter?
Many things can contribute to the development of a theory. A student made a list of some things that might help scientists develop a theory. Observations Calculations Conversations Publications From the student's list, which must be used in the development of every theory?
Ben has a snack with a combination of raisins, chocolate pieces, and nuts. As he eats the snack, Ben picks out all of the raisins. Which best describes the snack Ben is eating?
Capillary walls are only one layer of cells thick. Passage of oxygen into and out of the capillaries is controlled most by which process?
The average car uses about 25% of the available energy in each gallon of gasoline. The energy not used to run the car is released as heat and sound. Which statement best describes this occurrence?
How long does it take light from the nearest star other than the Sun to reach Earth?
Spider webs help spiders
Pouring water over a sloping tray of soil demonstrates how
Which layer of Earth is divided into plates?
The breakdown of ozone into oxygen results from the electromagnetic absorption spectrum of ozone. This production of oxygen in the ozone layer is caused by exposing ozone to a strong source of which type of electromagnetic radiation?
Which best describes what keeps the Moon orbiting around Earth?
The hypothesis of an expanding universe required which type of validation before being accepted as a significant part of scientific theory?
In which type of rock is the fossil imprint of a fern leaf most likely to be found?
At certain times of the year, meteor showers can be observed from Earth. Why are these objects from space usually harmless?
Which group of animals contains ONLY reptiles?
Why is the particular sequence of bases in a segment of DNA important to cells?
A meteorologist announces that the barometer reading is dropping. What does a barometer measure?
A cricket population includes approximately the same number of black and light-brown crickets. Black crickets are easier for birds to locate and eat. Over time, the population begins to consist of only light-brown crickets. The change in the color of the cricket population is a result of
When nearly vertical rays of solar energy strike a region of the Earth, that area has warm temperatures. What region of the Earth gets nearly vertical rays of solar energy year around?
Scientists from around the world would most likely meet at a conference held in Paris, France, to
Ferns belong to any one of about 12,000 species of plants grouped in their own division within the plant kingdom. Ferns are vascular, seedless, flowerless, and reproduce by spores. To which plant group do ferns belong?
A student ties a string around a weight and swings the weight in a circle around her body. If the student represents the Sun and the weight represents Earth, what does the string represent?
Scientists have studied the specific stages in the life cycle of stars. In which stage do stars spend most of their lifetime?
How does the energy in each trophic level of an energy pyramid compare to the energy in the preceding level?
The texture of soil depends primarily on the
As children grow, their body height usually
Which is a force that keeps the planets in orbit around the Sun?
What is the role of the kidneys in the excretory system?
Which number is closest to the estimated number of stars in the Milky Way galaxy?
Which statement best describes how a mountain range changes over time from wind and water erosion?
In a cell, a newly synthesized protein requires modification by the addition of a carbohydrate. Which structure will transport the protein from the site of synthesis to the site of modification?
Students notice that in the fall leaves of sugar maple trees turn red, but the leaves of black oak trees turn brown. The students are making
What instrument should be used to monitor atmospheric pressure changes as a weather system approaches?
Which of the following is responsible for determining the traits of an organism?
In which organism can cell walls be found?
Isaac Newton is best known for his study of
Some objects are attracted by magnets. Which object is attracted by a magnet?
Which action represents the use of technology to solve a problem?
When a guitar string is strummed, it produces sound by making
The meanings of mass and weight can often be confused. Which is an example of a change in both mass and weight?
Which of these are scientific classifications for galaxies in the universe?
A scientist was observing a unicellular organism over a period of time. He noticed that vacuoles kept moving to the same place in the plasma membrane to empty their contents outside the cell. Which organism was he observing?
Which form of precipitation is most likely to cause damage when hitting the roof of a car?
Which tool is best to use when comparing an animal cell to a plant cell?
The density of 200 mL of water was determined, and then 20 grams of sugar was dissolved in the water. The student determined the density of the sugar-water solution and recorded the collected data in a table. The sugar in this investigation is
During the year, the angle at which the path of the Sun appears in the sky varies. In the Northern Hemisphere, the path of the Sun appears higher on the horizon during the summer and lower on the horizon during the winter. Which factor most contributes to the variation in the path of the Sun across the sky?
Which is the best way to show the percent gas composition in Earth's atmosphere?
For the reaction between silver nitrate and sodium chloride, which of the following would be a product? AgNo_{3} + NaCl ->
Which invention has done the most to help predict weather and warn people of approaching storms?
During the Siberian summer, reindeer graze on young roots, fungi, grass, and other vegetation. In the cold winter months, they migrate south and rely on available, but less nutritious food, such as lichen. Increased snowfall during the entire winter in southern areas would result in reindeer having to
Sir Isaac Newton stated that every object in the universe attracts matter. The attraction depends on the mass of an object and the distance between the objects. What type of force did Newton describe?
What season is the Northern Hemisphere experiencing when it is tilted away from the Sun?
Heat is applied to a beaker of water, raising the water temperature a few degrees. What happens to the water molecules after heat is applied?
Which feature is most likely the result of a flowing river?
Which organ is the site of gas exchange between the body and the environment?
A positively-charged hydrogen ion has a much smaller radius than a neutral hydrogen atom. Which best explains this difference?
How are dormancy and hibernation similar in animals?
A small aluminum cube is dropped into a beaker of water to determine the buoyancy. Which of these is not necessary in determining the buoyant force acting on the cube?
Before concrete has hardened, it exhibits plasticity. This is an advantage because it allows the concrete to
Which event is an example of inherited behavior?
A student must explain the role of dead leaves in the ecosystem. Which statement will the student most likely provide to explain the importance of these leaves?
Which of the following statements is true about organisms that are producers?
If Earth revolved at a faster rate, what would most likely occur?
The distance from Earth to the Sun is one astronomical unit. Which unit best describes how many astronomical units it is from Earth to the far end of the Milky Way Galaxy?
Which is most likely to cause an organism to become endangered or extinct?
What are the characteristics of maritime polar air masses?
In an ecosystem, which list of organisms is in the correct order from producer to top-level consumer?
What is a true statement about all foods?
Which of the following is an example of an acidic solution?
When rock particles settle at the bottom of the ocean, they can continue to be buried by other particles. The process of cementation of these particles forms
Which of these is part of the description of protein?
Lightning from a thunderstorm strikes a 21 tree that falls to the forest floor and dies. During the next few years the dead tree undergoes many changes. What organisms are most likely responsible for the biological and chemical changes to the tree?
Sodium chloride is formed when sodium and chlorine chemically combine. Which term best describes sodium chloride?
Which three things do animals need from their environment in order to survive?
Most electricity in the United States is generated using coal, natural gas, nuclear energy, or hydropower. Which of these add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere?
A student has recorded rainfall amounts for 28 days and uses a calculator to determine the total rainfall. What does the student calculate when she divides the total rainfall by 28?
Which of the following was most likely the cause of the extinction of 60-100 species of native birds in Hawaii since the arrival of colonists?
Which is the correct sequence for the stages in the life cycle of a butterfly?
Oil is an example of a natural resource that is not renewable. Which is another example of an nonrenewable resource?
Students are using hammers to break apart rocks as part of an investigation. The students MUST wear goggles to
How would the Sun appear to an astronaut on Pluto compared with how it looks from Earth?
When using a microscope, it is best to use a wet mount to
A power plant uses chemical energy to produce electricity. What source of energy does the power plant most likely use?
Which subatomic particle has a negative charge?
Which list gives the correct order of food traveling through the digestive system after it is swallowed?
Parakeets are birds whose basic plumage color is green. However, parakeets exhibit a wide range of color both in the wild and in captivity. Which process is the source of the wide color variation observed in parakeet populations?
In science, old ideas can be changed when new discoveries alter existing information. Which situation is most likely an example of a rethinking of an existing idea?
How does sweat on the skin help the body?
How does the Sun power the water cycle?
In order to maintain good health, humans should
Which of the following is an abiotic factor in a river ecosystem?
When a conclusion is reached after an experiment, which is most likely the first step other scientists might take when checking the conclusion?
What allows for some organisms in a population to have an increased survival rate over other organisms of the same species?
Which environment is best for an organism that sleeps during the day and digs holes in the ground for shelter?
One difference between a chemical formula and a chemical equation is that the chemical equation shows
Plants that have stems that store water and no leaves would most likely live in a
Fossil fuels are considered nonrenewable because they
A baby bird must eat a lot of food to grow. During which stage of its life cycle is a butterfly most similar to a baby bird?
Which feature results when plates of different densities converge and one plate slips under the other?
Which of these is the BEST sign that the fall season has begun?
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that affects the joints. Which of these events causes the symptoms of this disease?
Chris stirs a cup of hot chocolate. He uses a wooden stick thinking it will stay cooler than a metal spoon. Which activity best describes the student's action?
Which would be best seen through a telescope?
A student conducts an investigation testing a material's effectiveness as a heat insulator. Which tool will help the student conduct this investigation safely?
Which equipment would best be used for an activity on a biochemistry unit?
When the fuel in a gasoline engine is burned, the energy conversion is from
Some prokaryotes once classified in the domain Bacteria are now classified as
Which of these is the primary source of energy in food webs?
An unusual type of fossil clam is found in rock layers high in the Swiss Alps. The same type of fossil clam is also found in the Rocky Mountains of North America. From this, scientists conclude that
The layered mixture of gases surrounding Earth is called the
Paul listens to music through his radio. Which best explains the sound Paul hears?
Plants are producers because they
A water hose was left running on a pile of dirt. What feature of stream erosion was most likely being demonstrated?
The best soil mixture for plant growth and drainage is
Which of these technologies helps a power company use renewable energy for the production of electricity?
Windmills are used to obtain usable energy from wind. Which would be an advantage of using a windmill?
Which of these is an example of a new substance being formed?
Which of these can make a shadow on the ground during the day?
Which system protects the body by responding to the presence of a virus?
The symptoms of influenza infection are partly caused by the
Which cellular organelle modifies fatty acids?
Which part of Earth's structure exists in the solid phase due to low temperatures?
Which sea otter behavior is learned?
The magnetic poles of Earth frequently change location. What is the direct cause of this change in magnetic pole location?
Years ago, most family members lived near one another. Today, family members often live all over the country. People are able to live far from their loved ones because of the technologies of
Which two body systems would most directly remove extra fluid from a person's lungs?
Sedimentary rock helps scientists piece together the history of Earth most likely using clues from
The energy that is stored in food originally comes from
Which of these shows how frozen water changes as the temperature of the air increases?
Which of the following properties best describes a material's ability to resist scratching?
Scientists noted that muscles and bones would need physical stress to remain healthy during manned space flights. Which of these had to be planned for because of this need?
If a species of bird stopped reproducing, which of these would happen?
When performing a new experiment for the first time, a scientist reaches an unexpected conclusion. What must the scientist do in order to have the conclusion accepted by other scientists?
Which system produces most of the hormones in the human body?
Which tool should a student use to see the patterns on a small object?
Robots are used to help manufacture cars. One problem with this is
Which two body systems interact to produce antibodies that require essential amino acids?
Which chemical is a compound?
Two spotted leopards produce a litter of four cubs. Three of the cubs are spotted and one is solid black. The black coat is probably what type of trait?
Which physical property is used to identify a mineral based on its resistance to being scratched?
A negatively charged rubber rod was brought near some small pieces of paper. The rod's charges repelled the negative charges in the pieces. Which of the following caused the repulsion of the negative charges?
Mangrove trees are affected by several factors. Which is an abiotic factor contributing to the energy cycle of a mangrove ecosystem?
What does a light-year measure?
Which of these structures in a plant cell allows a plant to make food?
Patricia and her classmates are visiting different rocky areas in the city. They want to know what kind of rocks can be found in each area. If the investigation is done correctly, what will Patricia and her classmates do each time they visit an area?
The electrical charge of the nucleus of an atom is +12. How many electrons does the atom have in its neutral state?
Which of these is a reason that scientists revise theories?
Which of the following results when hydrogen and chlorine chemically bond to form hydrogen chloride?
Scientists are able to conclude that a forested ecosystem existed in Antarctica millions of years ago by studying
Which Earth movement results in day and night?
Upwelling moves the water of the deep ocean to the ocean's surface. What else does upwelling move to the surface?
Which body system functions by bringing in oxygen and removing carbon dioxide?
A topographic map is primarily used to determine the
A change in the pattern of warm ocean currents can cause a climate change by
Which part of digestion is mainly a chemical change?
Which object is best seen with a microscope?
In which example does an object move because of the force of gravity?
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was established in 1970 to address problems that existed in the environment. Which is the EPA most likely interested in reducing?
In order for plants to grow, the cells require nutrients in the form of minerals. The minerals come from
HIV makes the body vulnerable to secondary infections by targeting
A student is investigating the properties of a mineral. The student tests the mineral by putting it under an ultraviolet light. Which property of the mineral can be identified using this test?
A student plans to grow algal colonies in solutions with different concentrations of liquid fertilizer. Which is a clear and testable hypothesis to guide this investigation?
Which process is taking place when water freezes between cracks in rocks?
The human body temperature is normally 98.6°F. As a person exercises, the body temperature starts to increase. As a result of the increased body temperature, the perspiration process begins to cool the body. Which best describes what the body is doing when it perspires?
In living organisms, the level of organization from least complex to most complex is
Which type of model best shows the location of underwater ocean ridges?
A student put a metal pot on the stove to boil some water. The metal transferred heat to the water through
Which feature is a kitten most likely to inherit from its parents?
Proteins are compounds formed in the cells of plants and animals. Which element is included in every protein molecule?
A rocket is traveling toward space. What force must the rocket act against as it moves away from Earth?
A group of workers needs to move a piano from the second floor of a building. The piano is too wide to fit through the door, so they will lower the piano to the ground through a window. Which tool would be best to help the workers lower the piano from the window?
Why is a spacesuit inflated like a balloon?
Which term best describes the process responsible for cave formation that results from rock being dissolved by groundwater?
What happens to colored sugar when it is added to water?
Which statement about plant and animals cells is true?
Farm fertilizers are often carried by runoff into the Mississippi River and down to the Gulf of Mexico, resulting in algae blooms. Which of these results from the decomposition of the algae blooms?
Jennifer is jumping rope. Which type of characteristic is she most likely demonstrating?
A teacher breaks a bar of pure copper into two different sized pieces. Which is the most likely difference between the two pieces?
Blood is a fluid made up of several different parts. What level of structural organization best describes blood?
Scientists found large areas of fossilized wood in a desert in Arizona. The fossilized wood is evidence of the ancient environment. Based on the evidence, what was the ancient environment in this area?
Ruben is using a compass to find out which direction the wind is blowing. Which of the following would be best for him to observe to help him find the direction of the wind?
A farmer predicts a new sprinkler will keep water from being wasted. What term best describes this prediction?
Tides on Earth are mostly caused by the gravitational pull of
When rain falls on the land, some of it is absorbed by surface sediment. How porous the surface sediments are controls how much water is absorbed. Which of the following will most likely result in an area where surface sediment is NOT porous?
Which of the following parts of a car belongs to its control system?
Which substance can be used to conduct electricity in a circuit?
Which unit is used to express the amount of energy in food?
A student measured how quickly a car rolled down a hill. Which tool should the student have used to measure how quickly the car rolled down the hill?
Water at 20 degrees Celsius is placed on a stove. As the water is heated, thermal energy is absorbed by the water. If the water is heated to a maximum temperature of 80 degrees Celsius, what happens as a result of the increased temperature?
The electromagnetic spectrum is described as a
Which of the following is most important in producing the seasons on Earth?
Which of the following is designed to convert energy into mechanical work?
A student hears the sound of a bell. Which of the following carries the sound of the bell to the student?
The first stage of soil formation is the weathering of rock into fine particles. To make a good soil for growing plants, which would be best to add to the rock particles?
Which best describes a scientific theory?
Scientists are studying the factors that influence the climate of a region. In attempts to gather accurate data, the scientists should use data that includes the
Why do two surfaces get warm when they are rubbed together?
Two high tides and two low tides occur on Earth every
A book placed on a table is observed to remain stationary. Which statement about the observation would be considered a fact rather than an opinion?
Having students wash their hands frequently with soap and water will limit the spread of infectious disease by
Which object helps people understand what makes up white light?
Water vapor sometimes condenses into stratus clouds that are in contact with the ground. What forms as a result of this process?
One of the main causes of acid rain is
Which of these activities makes the MOST air pollution?
The Hardy-Weinberg law is only valid when
Deposition of sediment during floods makes the land near some rivers
Old, worn-out rubber tires are called scrap tires. Which way of disposing of scrap tires is best for the environment?
Which material is the best conductor of heat at room temperature?
A student drops a white tablet into a glass of water, producing carbon dioxide gas. This is a demonstration of
Which of these is a structure that is present in all organisms?
Which set of conditions will produce an electric current in a closed loop of wire?
Extensive folding of sedimentary rock layers on Earth provides indirect evidence of certain processes occurring throughout Earth's history. Which of these is most likely one of these processes?
An ice cube melts on a hot summer day because the energy of the particles
The relationship between ticks and a dog can best be described as
Small grasshoppers shed their outer covering as they grow larger. Which animal also sheds its outer covering as it grows larger?
Two atoms of oxygen combine to form pure oxygen gas. What is the electrical charge of the O_{2} molecules?
Which is not a type of electromagnetic wave?
What is one way to help slow down or stop the greenhouse effect?
Great distances in space are measured in
Which of the following gives a plant cell its rigid structure?
Which alternative energy resource changes part of a river into a lake?
A student in a laboratory transfers a beaker containing a hot solution from the lab table to a cool water bath. Which of the following parts of the system experiences an increase in heat energy?
Which example best illustrates kinetic energy?
Which theory about the origin of the universe states that a densely packed sphere exploded, forming clouds that condensed into galaxies?
Which characteristic is shared by all members of Arthropoda and Chordata phyla?
Which of the following is certain to change as a ball accelerates?
One year a farmer decided not to plant crops in one of his fields. During that year his farm received a greater amount of precipitation than normal. Which will most likely occur in that unplanted field as a result of the greater precipitation?
Which group of energy sources are ALL renewable?
What happens to the molecules of a liquid when the liquid cools?
Some individuals are unable to digest the lactose found in the milk of cows. The digestive systems of these individuals most likely lack which?
Use the information below to answer the question. The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. Which organs are used in reproduction?
Which of the following best describes the relationship between frequency and wavelength of electromagnetic waves?
Which pair would be most necessary for life to develop on another planet?
How are light and sound similar?
When heated, mercuric oxide decomposes to form liquid mercury and oxygen. A scientist heated 10 grams (g) of mercuric oxide and formed 9.3 grams of liquid mercury. How many grams of oxygen were formed?
When chlorine gas reacts with sodium metal, what type of substance is formed?
A structure that carries a single unit of hereditary information is a
Muscle cells need to quickly convert energy from food molecules into a usable form. For this reason, which of the following do muscle cells have in greater numbers than most other types of cells?
Which would help conserve water?
Which of these are both supplied to Earth by the Sun?
A red flowered plant (RR) is crossed with a white flowered plant (WW) and produces plants with pink flowers (RW). If two pink flowered plants are crossed, what color offspring could be produced?
Which is the most accurate model to show how amino acids form proteins?
What is the main function of the chloroplasts in plant cells?
Gravity can be defined as a force of attraction between objects. The effects of gravity can be witnessed in many systems. Which of these actions is an example of gravity influencing other systems?
Which characteristic of a cold-water upwelling near the coast of Northern California results in a large concentration of marine organisms?
When mountains are formed, there is an interaction between areas of Earth. Which two will interact and result in the formation of mountains?
A model of the Moon would be different from a model of Earth in that the Moon should
Which of the following correctly lists the structures in space from smallest to largest?
Some changes are fast. Some changes are slow. Which of these changes is most likely the slowest?
Which of these diseases is caused by a bacterium?
When is the most energy transferred from the Sun to water in the water cycle?
Which of the following shows the correct sequence of inventions?
When two animals live in the same area and depend on the same organism for food, they are
Which statement describes a primary function of the cell wall of a plant cell?
Which metric units should be used to describe the mass of an object?
Which form of energy is produced when a guitar string vibrates?
Andre learned that plants survive through a process called photosynthesis. Which substance do plants produce during photosynthesis?
For years, scientists have classified plants according to their characteristics. Which most likely has led scientists to better identify and discover new species of plants?
Which material best conducts heat and electricity?
Which two characteristics affect a planet's gravitational attraction to the Sun?
When a prairie ecosystem was disturbed, an invasive grass species outcompeted the native grass. The new grass had less nutritional value for the organisms living in the area. Which category of organism will be affected by this change first?
In the 1970s, the pesticide DDT was used to kill insects that damaged fruit and vegetable crops. Most insects died from being exposed to DDT, but some survived. These surviving insects contributed to an increase in their population by
Binary stars orbit around the center of mass of the two stars. What causes the stars to remain together?
After a star runs out of most of its hydrogen fuel, it becomes hotter and more luminous. What stage does this represent in the life cycle of a star?
How does no-till farming help the environment?
In a laboratory, a sealed container with 100 g of steam is cooled until all the steam becomes a liquid. The container is then cooled further until all the water becomes a solid. Which of the following remains constant during both of these changes?
A student has decided to investigate whether the number of flowers on a plant will increase if the water supply to the plant is increased. She has five pots of geranium plants to use in her experiment. What factor in the experiment should be varied for the five plants in order to answer the student's question?
The energy that allows the water cycle to occur comes from
Organisms that are classified as multicellular must have
Where does air go when a person breathes in?
Kudzu vines grow by climbing and wrapping around trees. Trees covered by kudzu can die because they are starved of sunlight. What type of relationship exists between the trees and the kudzu growing on them?
In the United States, which is responsible for ensuring the safety of the country's drinking water?
A student makes a fruit drink by stirring a powdered mix into cold water. Why is the fruit drink a solution?
Which life function is the same for an amoeba as for other freshwater protists?
Proxima Centauri is the closest star to the Sun. Which units do astronomers most often use for the distance between Earth and Proxima Centauri?
One positive effect of recycling aluminum cans to manufacture new beverage containers is
Students are conducting an investigation to see how sunlight affects the speed of plant growth. They measure the growth of the plant at the end of two weeks. What would be the best way to communicate the results of this investigation?
The conservation of matter can be demonstrated by using chemical equations. Which chemical equation demonstrates the conservation of matter?
As the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases, which occurrence is most likely a long-term result?
Which mineral, found in Arkansas, is an ore that can be used to produce aluminum?
A summer day begins with a clear, sunny sky. Then, dark clouds form in the afternoon. What type of weather will MOST likely happen next?
Eagles have strong, sharp beaks that are most likely adapted for the eagle to eat
When a spoon hits a table, it makes a loud sound. When the spoon hits a soft cushion, it does not make a sound. What is the difference between the table and the cushion that accounts for the sound?
When Dennis operates his lawnmower, he notices the engine makes a lot of noise. He also notices that the engine gets very hot. Which best describes the heat and noise generated from the lawnmower?
What objects are affected by Earth's gravity?
Abnormal cell division in humans may result in
A donkey and a horse can be bred to produce a mule. Which observation is evidence that donkeys and horses are two different species?
What should students use to identify the percent chance of a trait being passed down from a parent to its offspring?
Which rankings of trees would most likely useful in a scientific study of fruit production in apple trees?
Which of the following characteristics is an acquired trait?
Which stimulus causes a responding plant to demonstrate phototropism?
Estuaries are marine environments located in areas where fresh water from rivers flow into the ocean. Estuaries are one of the most biologically productive ecosystems. Birds, fish, turtles and many other organisms inhabit these ecosystems. Which will most likely cause changes to estuary habitats on a global scale?
The trunk of a pine tree supports the tree. Which part of a daisy supports the plant the same way?
What property of electromagnetic waves makes it possible to use these waves to transmit information between a space shuttle and NASA mission control centers on the ground?
A student is investigating solar energy by cooking food in an oven powered by the Sun. On which of the following days will the food cook most quickly?
Which is the correct order of the planets from the Sun?
Which of these is the basic building block of complex organisms?
Which human response is most likely to occur because the air temperature is 90°F?
What are the properties of the Earth's crust and mantle that are most responsible for Earth's tectonic activity?
When a butterfly emerges from its chrysalis, its wings are crumpled. In order to expand its wings, the butterfly hangs upside down, causing fluid to be pumped into the veins of its wings. This pumping most likely expands the wings by
Which of the following characteristics will best prevent a tree from being blown over by high winds during a storm?
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have small, free-floating organelles. The cell makes these organelles from nucleic acids and amino acids found in food. Without these organelles, the cell could not make proteins. What are these organelles called?
Which temperature is the freezing point of water?
Which statement best describes the molecules in a sample of water that was heated from a liquid to a gas?
Constellations are patterns of objects seen in the night sky from Earth. How are the objects in constellations like the Sun?
Which is a trait a human most directly inherits from its parents?
When observing a very small piece of dust in a liquid under a microscope, the dust appears to jiggle slightly. This movement results from the dust interacting with the molecules in the liquid. What property of the molecules in the liquid causes this effect?
Which of the following happens in our solar system?
On a cold day, a student felt the tires of her bike before riding it to the store. When she arrived at the store, she felt the tires again and noticed that they were warmer. What caused the temperature of the bicycle tires to change?
Chloroplasts in cells make it possible for the cells to
Which of these is the most important product of Virginia forests?
Research in which of these areas has the greatest impact on the environment?
The surface of Earth is covered mostly by
Which pair of systems is responsible for the flow of blood in the human body?
Where are the most reactive metals located on the periodic table?
What major and potentially catastrophic events can be predicted to occur in the Northern Hemisphere between the months of June and November?
The pull of gravity from Earth has the greatest effect on
What is the main advantage of making a laptop computer light in weight?
It takes 365 days for
Some scientists once believed that Earth was solid like a marble. Which of these has been most responsible for changes in the scientific view of the structure of Earth?
A student wants to organize a group of animals into two categories based on observable external features. Which display will most appropriately show the two categories of animals?
Ribosomes present in a particular cell are smaller than those found in plants. In which taxonomic group or groups could the cell be classified?
What happens to the path of a light ray as it passes from air into water at an angle?
Vibrations in the air caused by hitting a drum form
As humans grow, their bodies change. Which of these statements explains how humans grow?
Which event below involves a constructive force?
Which of the following are formed when two crustal plates collide with one another?
The nucleus contains DNA. Which statement best describes how DNA controls the working of the cell?
Which of the following provides the best evidence that Earth has evolved over geologic time?
The best explanation of why carnivores are dependent on plants is because they
In the late 1600s, Anton van Leeuwenhoek began making observations with simple magnifying lenses that he constructed. To which scientific field is Leeuwenhoek credited with the most contributions?
Which section of Earth is composed primarily of liquid metal?
One way humans store energy is by making the molecule glycogen. Clusters of which atoms are rearranged when the body digests plant sugars to make glycogen?
The number of stars in the Milky Way Galaxy is best estimated as
Which type of substances serves as a catalyst for reactions that break large food molecules into smaller useful molecules?
What effect does gravity always have on an object on Earth?
Which is the best example of a chemical reaction?
Some one-celled organisms can reproduce by the process of
One important use of coal is to produce energy for homes. Coal can be burned and converted to
Which of the following is NOT a mixture?
What kind of energy do all moving objects have?
In a forest ecosystem, the squirrels eat seeds from trees. The squirrels are then eaten by hawks, owls, and foxes. If there were no more owls present in this ecosystem, which would most likely happen in the forest?
Which of the following has the greatest direct influence on movement of the lithosphere?
When humans first began to grow crops, which of these most likely contributed to the extinction of native animal species?
Which of these does the MOST harm to the air?
A scanning electron microscope is best suited for observing
A bird eats a brightly-colored insect that tastes bad. The bird avoids preying on this type of insect again. This example is best described as
In winter, the arctic fox has white fur. In summer, its fur changes color to brown and gray. The change in fur color helps the arctic fox to ___.
In which ways are hills most different from mountains?
A bird builds a nest to
Which statement best describes the motion of the molecules of a solid object?
What happens when salt water is boiled?
Which set of elements has similar bonding properties?
Which body system processes foods into a useable source of energy?
What is the best way for a scientist to begin an investigation on a population of deer?
Which property of an object describes how easily electricity travels through it?
Which is a statement of fact?
Sydney is learning about the sources of energy that can run out. Which energy source will run out the fastest?
The first organisms to occupy an area after a prairie fire are known as
Which of the following is caused by a virus?
When a beam of light passes through a clear, convex lens, the light will mostly
The symptoms of strep throat infection are a red and swollen throat. What is the most likely cause of strep throat?
Compared to the particles in a hardened lava sample, the particles in a liquid lava sample
Which characteristic do both the Moon and Earth share?
Which would be the most likely effect of a large decrease in the number of woodpeckers in a forest?
Which two life processes occur in both plants and humans?
In order for Galileo to build a telescope, he needed to know about
A birdwatcher wants to identify an eastern bluebird. What feature of a bird should the birdwatcher evaluate first to identify an eastern bluebird?
When a neutral atom gains or loses electrons, it becomes
Which is an effect of regular exercise?
A light year is used to measure
As an object falls, air resistance gradually increases until it is equal with the pull of gravity. This effect is called
All of these elements are metals except
Observation and measurement are important to scientific investigations because
When air rises over the open ocean, a low pressure system is formed. Which factor increases the potential of a low pressure system developing into a hurricane in the Northern Hemisphere?
Imprints of the shells of ocean clams are often found in the rocks of the Appalachian Mountains. What do these imprint fossils most likely indicate?
A population of ground squirrels has established a community in the grasslands of the Great Plains. Temperatures often reach -15°C for most of the winter. What is the most likely behavior the ground squirrels use to survive these winter temperatures?
Which is the lowest level of environmental organization that would include the water quality and air temperature in an area?
When you bend your arm at the elbow, the bones and muscles in your arm are acting as a system. What simple machine does this system represent?
A student places a pan of water on the stove. What happens to some of the water as it is heated to a boil?
What are the parts that make up an atom?
One end of a metal rod is placed over a flame during an investigation. A thermometer is touching the opposite end of the metal rod. Which best describes what is happening during this investigation?
Mountains are most likely formed
Read the information about Alice's science project then answer the question. Alice needed to design a science project. She decided that she wanted to focus her project on how an earthworm's behavior helps it survive. Alice wrote down four ideas about earthworm behavior that she wanted to test. Which idea can be tested experimentally?
What do the elements sulfur (S), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and bromine (Br) have in common?
Tissue plasminogen activator is a natural blood thinner. The coded sequence for the blood thinner is called PLAT , found on chromosome 8. It is used to treat people who have heart attacks and strokes. Tissue plasminogen activator can be made through genetic engineering. What is tissue plasminogen activator?
Which of these groups contains only metric measurements?
Scientists use large optical telescopes to obtain information about the planets in the solar system. What wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation provide this information?
Which scientist is credited for the development of the polio vaccine?
When a volcano erupts, new lava is deposited on the slopes of the volcano. After the lava cools and hardens, which types of organisms will most likely be the first to live on the new material?
Ella waves good-bye from the bus. What body system pulls on bones to let Ella wave her arm?
Coral reefs are found in shallow tropical ocean waters. A coral reef is a diverse ecosystem that is supported by the photosynthesis of marine plants and the algae that live within the tissues of the coral. Given this information, when would the waters in a coral reef likely have the highest dissolved oxygen concentration?
What keeps the planets in orbit around the Sun?
As seen from Earth, the appearance of the Moon changes throughout the month. What causes the appearance of the Moon to change?
In producing an automobile, which of the 27 following is the best use of a robot?
The Theory of Plate Tectonics is based on
Which of the following must all plant and animal species do in order for each species to survive?
Which activity illustrates the main function of the motor neuron complex?
Nutrients are recycled when materials decompose in an ecosystem. Which is the best example of the decomposition process where organic material is recycled in an ecosystem?
What is one function of tree roots?
Food contains stored chemical energy. Which units of measurement can be used to compare the amounts of energy in different foods?
The freezing and expanding of water in the cracks of rocks is a form of
Which of the following is a way that everyone can help with conservation efforts?
Historically, how has the compass been used?
A cut to the skin is treated with antiseptic first to avoid
Which would be a safe practice to exercise during laboratory investigations?
The shape of the moon appears to change regularly during each month. Which of the following best explains why the shape of the moon appears to change?
How do the nutrients necessary for plant growth get into the soil?
Which part of a sunflower plant absorbs water and nutrients?
