When boiling butter, when it's ready, you can
To permanently attach metal legs to a chair, you can
how do you indent something?
how do you shake something?
Clean tires
how do you taste something?
To create a makeshift ice pack,
What should I use as a stain on a wooden bowl I've just made.
How to boil eggs.
how do you stab something?
How to quickly soften butter for baking?
How can I save my milk if I am going to be leaving town for a bit?
how do you open a capri-sun
how do you turn on an ipad screen?
How to season raw chicken.
pin
How to tie pieces of paper together.
how do you get leg muscles?
To make a tomato sauce taste more like a pizza sauce,
how do you draw with chalk?
Convert unused paint to solid waste.
How to check your Facebook feed
How to Prepare Puffed Pastry for Baked Brie Pumpkin
how do I make chocolate pasta?
how do you flood a room?
How else can you mix the biscuits and butter if you do not have a food processor when making a chocolate nutella tart?
What is the best way to make a black tiger shirt?
How can I get oil stains out of my driveway?
How to prepare a bath.
Soothe a painful sunburn.
To Make a Breakfast Pizza
To french manicure your nails, you can
how do you save a picture you took on your iphone?
To create a basic wooden serving tray,
What can I use for fuel in an alcohol stove?
To crush the petals of a flower, you can
To attach sections of copper heating pipe together, you can
shovel
To get cash for old, unused drinking bottles,
How do you calculate your gas mileage?
How can I grow tomatoes without a garden?
How to prevent pain while cutting your nails?
How to shower correctly
Clean residue off a drill bit
how do I make lamb cutlets?
how to avoid danger?
How do you get the water temperature right to take a shower?
How do I remove vinyl wall art from the walls?
One seeks to decorate their fire place.
To prevent eye infections,
How can you tell if a child is a boy or a girl?
How do you cut gnocchi without a knife?
One wants their fence to be made out of wood.
Make use of post-its before you throw them away.
To communicate with somebody in a language you don't understand,
To empty a bagless vacuum cleaner without mess
How can I cut the handles of metal cutlery?
To get rid of toilet bowl stains.
how to use a capped pen?
two forks
vine
Stop car from overheating.
How do I use coconut oil for frizzy hair?
How to make a tinder bundle.
What materials do you need to make a pokeball?
how to unclog a toilet without a plunger
To clean up broken glass
newspaper
What can I do to store documents externally and privately.
Make my seams nearly invisible.
What are the ingredients for a chicken confit?
how do you wear a bracelet?
To groom a dog's foot,
How to clean kitchen cabinet doors.
how do you deny something?
Cover a lightswitch cover with a picture
How do you cut wood?
How can we make a mobile charging station?
How to make a simple bow and arrow?
Prevent air bubbles in cheese cake.
To be able to hear the television better,
To clean rust stains off of the bath tub.
What kind of dye is needed to make slime?
To determine if a wound needs stitches,
how can I make my pasta begin to taste better?
Best flowers to grow for making bouquets and other cut flower arrangements.
How do you make the first braid?
To power off your iPhone,
How to cut drywall panels?
How can I make my margarita more sour?
How do I get rid of a bug infestation in my vegetable garden?
How can I make chocolate ice cream?
To make homemade air freshener.
how do you pop your ears?
How to remove the seems from jeans and turn into a skirt?
What liquid can be used to help clean cartridge-based video games?
making the forms
To make pancakes without making a mess.
How do you sharpen scissors?
To determine if someone has romantic feelings for you,
Prevent bread from getting soggy in cooler.
milk
bottle
To prevent sticking in juice-soaked gummy bears
coffee filter
To mash bananas to make banana bread.
How do you get oil off of tortillas?
Cleaning your house binds
How can I make a degreaser out of Oranges?
To protect a table when painting a wooden project on top of it, you can
credit card
To easily get through a large crowd of people,
how do you turn off an alarm in the alarm app on iphone?
What is a good tool to use for determining how long an item should be in a project?
How to hang lights without showing the hanging mechanism?
Fight depression with entertainment.
How to put AA battery in the taser.
How do I complete a word search
pick
How can I keep snow from sticking to a snow shovel?
To make Christmas feel more magical,
To determine the exact weight of a quantity of flour, you can
To strengthen latex while setting in a mold, you can
How do you open a gift without ripping the paper?
What should I use in order to make sure the measurements are accurate?
To take the steering wheel off the your car
How to clean car windows?
how do you consume gum?
How can you get permanent marker stains off your body?
To move files from one location to another on your computer
screws
How does one eat a kiwifruit?
How can I apply eyeshadow without a brush?
How do I melt wax ?
How to tie a Double Fisherman's Knot
To prevent cookies from burning.
sock
How to dust a room
How can I power wash under my car?
how do you tip a waiter with cash?
How to make an oreo pie crust.
To remove permanent marker from wood furniture or walls,
To etch a design into a glass jar
To make a home made cough remedy,
How do you clean a washing machine?
needle
How to juice a lemon
how do you climb into an attic?
How to dry a towel quickly without a dryer?
Natural mosquito repellent?
What do I do if filling gets stuck on the side of the blender when making pavlova cookies?
How can I stop a mosquito bite from itching?
Make floating votive candles.
to marinade chicken without mess
To add sugar and edible glitter to candy apples.
How to make a leather jacket appear worn?
To make a protective space around your garden,
How to puree strawberries.
To secure free end of paracord when tying knots
How do I cool down the meat filling when making a beef and bourbon pie?
what to bake tomatoes in
To mix flour and salt together for a crust, you can
Add extra storage for kitchen tools.
how do you put a nail in wood?
how to keep pasta perfect
How can I identify keys quickly on a key ring?
how do you see the solution to a problem you entered on the calculator on iphone?
Frying up some french fries
To secure the ends of braided plastic bags,
How do you put out a candle?
To thin out chocolate layer for Twix Cake.
Short term, how can I fix a tear in a tent?
How to take off your makeup with conditioner
To form the melted beeswax and shea butter mixture into a usable shape as a lip balm.
Double the amount of juice extracted from lemons.
penny
Shred cheese for pizza
How to paint a wall
ladders
How do you measure a teaspoon of cherry syrup?
How to decorate car canopy planters.
how to easily slice avocados
crossing out
Apply first coat of paint to ceiling.
How can I keep batter from splattering when mixing?
Remove frost from car window.
To prepare yeast.
Storing plywood/ rolling plywood.
How do you put a pillow on a bed?
To cream together butter and white sugar for the love cookies
how do you record a show on dvr?
tack
how to make mushroom amatriciana
computer
How can I cool off my home?
How do you block the light of a flashlight?
Make a bath to hydrate skin.
how to keep bacteria from forming in flower vases
How to more easily fold thick pieces of leather.
Can i blend my own peppermint tea?
To clean off rust from a metal table that was resistant to vinegar.
How can I keep fleas of my dog naturally?
How to cover the handle of your purse when it is coming a part.
how do I identify Certus constellation
How can I organize screws and nuts and small items in my garage?
how do you put slipper on?
How to make text bold in OneNote
To open a salt packet.
how to line a baking pan with parchment
To build a compost bin
To make a blanket from t-shirts.
To make use out of a torn pair of jeans that are torn below the knee,
To protect a metal surface without changing the way it looks
Create peppermint fudge
How to simply organize cables?
how to cook fattier, cheaper cuts of meat
cardboard
How do you get rid of a wasp's nest outside of your home?
How to clean windows after removing hardware.
What can I use to weigh down a shower pan after applying it with thin set?
How to cut skateboard deck to use as base for basket on bicycle.
To prevent onions from making you cry when they are cut,
To remove the bark from a stick of wood, you can
spit
How to preserve whole grapes.
How much paint do you need to paint a room?
Prevent doll hair for hardening.
To have a fun workout.
How do I break a cake apart in order to make cake pops?
How to Take Action to Reduce Global Warming
To turn off the water supply to your house
get wine out carpet
Find if a 6 sided die is fair.
Clean a hairbrush.
What dry ingredients need to be combined together to make cinnamon sugar mall almond cookies?
How can you make long cuts on boards that are narrow?
To prevent dough from sticking to your hands, you can
To prepare onions to be cooked for another dish, you can
How to mail a letter.
How to cure and seal concrete?
How do ensure the shelves will fit?
How to bake banana bread.
The best ratio for homemade dog food is
Tell when there was a drought by looking at a tree slice.
how do you stop an argument?
Get pumpkin seeds for roasting.
What is the most energy efficient way to cool your car if you are driving over 40 mph?
How to you attach a piece of felt to a piece of wood?
Why do doctors get paid high?
How can I darken wood?
How do I freeze the bananas when making banana ice cream?
Keep shine on leather shoes.
To prevent chance of a oil boilover and subsequent fire during deep frying a turkey
old shirt
To ease an earache naturally.
Digita moviel editor 
How can I set no bake nanaimo bars?
To remove rough edges from a board once you've cut it, you can
Jug
Make recyclable gift bag.
paper towel
To make finish soak into wood, you can
How to attach the ropes to the exercise machine base?
Prevent liquid layer on peanut butter.
How to make a wheel out of plywood
Make a waste basket from cardboard.
How to frost cake.
How do I get my white underwear extra white?
One wishes to have a multi-functioned belt.
How can I make a criss-cross design on my peanut butter cookies.
sewing machine
How to best mow the lawn
Forgot your device recharger?
How to grow vegetables at home in a greenhouse during the winter?
Hang kitchen knives against the wall.
How would you make the round ends of a duct tape bag?
What should you use to loosen a rusted bolt?
How to change the playback speed on Youtube
How do you win in Four Square?
Can I make my own BBQ seasoning?
To increase the value of a home, a homeowner should,
Prevent car door from hitting garage wall.
Treat poison ivy.
vise
How can I play slide guitar without an actual slide?
To saw a piece of wood in half,
What supplies are needed to make sugar skull string lights?
To keep from having to cook everyday,
how to make a peppermint stripe
To keep the sun out of your house,
mixer
How do I mix together the ingredients for baked pears?
tumbler
paper towel
To increase a person's typing speed,
teaspoon
how to DIY a grease trap for a grill
How to put out a candle with a lot of wet wax?
Clean dried sticky soda out of a soda bottle
chop sticks
How to nauturally kills weeds and grasses in flower beds.
how do you major in something in college?
How can I re-use a piano bench that I am thinking about selling?
How can I clean my tub with a homemade cleaner?
how to lock a tape measure.
To create a back piece of a chair,
Stay awake while driving.
To keep socks smelling fresh.
how do you open a book?
clothing
To eat healthier.
Heat
How can I use baking soda to clean my shoes?
How To make Easy Chocolate Ganache
What materials do you need to make flash cotton?
how to identify a brown recluse spider
How do I get involved in community sports
Cleaning a tent
Hydrate.
How do you microwave food?
fingers
Make a gift card holder.
How to cross a crosswalk
Make a secure password for smartphone.
What is the best thing to use to cut a cork into disks?
Make your own pillowcases.
make turban
Learn how to soak a ring before using a cleaning paste.
what makes something a carnivore?
To add a light inside a lamp.
How to adjust a picture hanging on a wall
How can you get a discount from Redbox for movies?
ski pole
To find new music when you are bored of your usual bands,
how to use extra caramelized onions
How to keep your cake from sticking to the pan while it cooks
To cut out spekulatius cookies from the dough
How to kill weeds that come up through the cracks in walkways.
Should I store my bullets with my gun?
How to make the base of your DIY candle holder?
To easily store and identify bed sheet sets,
What can I use to unlock a door
When cutting into something that produces dust
To check the done-ness of a piece of meat on the grill,
Make your own potting soil.
How to burn your name into wood.
sock
How to keep croquettes from going mushy after cooking?
To protect your eyes when using a power saw, you can
How to Ripen Peaches
To strip the insulation from a cord,
Remove gloss from furniture.
Pre-warm work clothes that will be worn the next morning.
To remove the seeds of a jalapeno without damaging the pepper,
How to make two quarts of  sun tea.
Prevent spiders from living in garage.
how to keep pizza crust crispy
To prevent the fats from escaping a homemade burger patty,
To prepare yeast for bread making.
how do you turn change into dollar bills?
To combine cornstarch, oil, and baking soda, you can
How would I go about pinning down two pieces of aligned fabric?
Hide candy from kids.
What color paint should be used in a steampunk project?
how to make stuffed figs
How do avoid putting a shirt on backwards when both sides look the same?
How to hide a book in a book shelf?
How to Fix a Running Toilet
How to peel an onion.
how do you make a u-turn?
Infusing Oil with Orange
To grease parchment paper for cooking homemade brownies.
How can I get this can of beans open?
How can I unscrew a screw without a screwdriver?
To get a dog to go to the bathroom outside more.
floss
how to clean windows with a mop
When taping adhesive foil to glass what is any easy way to make sure that the tape is firmly attached?
How do I create shot glasses made of ice ?
dish
push pin
How to waterproof your canvas shoes
To clean out an old plastic trash bin,
How can I cut leather with a nice smooth edge?
Make fresh orange juice.
food processor
How do you melt beeswax?
To request a forgotten password.
How to unclog hair from a bathroom drain.
How do I eat an apple quarter?
What materials are needed for fluffy slime?
To attach two pieces of wood together, you can
How should I store vitamin C face oil?
How do you sand a piece of wood?
Do I need to chill the cookie dough
how to make rosemary-lemon mashed potatoes
how ot bake pumpkin
How can I make cheap meat tender?
how do you stop a dog from biting?
What supplies do you need to make a light out of glue sticks?
How to easily fade jeans?
oven
to stay hydrated during your flight
How can I saute the onions?
cages
how do you cook beef stew?
Pollutions
How can I painlessly get rid of a splinter?
Create aluminum curtain.
Make an outdoor fort.
To clean a drain
How do you mark a queen bee?
how to make vocabulary flash cards
To cut perfect cookies
rock
How to naturally trim your dogs nails
To keep your dogs nails from getting too long and becoming a health problem,
To remove the protective cover from a wire, you can
hide your valuables while at the beach.
To make Oreo cookies look like a spider,
To hide device wires in homemade nightstand.
flour
Make a model of rubber tire tread.
how to insert a ps4 game into the ps4
To give paper an aged look
book
How to make guacamole.
What is an inexpensive material to use when filling in an unwanted swimming pool.
Where can I buy plants
how to replace buttermilk
Retreive a stuck item from a vending machine.
How to whiten your nails after getting rid of the dirt in them.
How to smooth top of metal tiki holder.
drawer
To cut through pieces of styrofoam
How can I make an origami paper fan?
How do you clean the bottom of a soda can?
How to do you stop a door hinge from squeaking?
how do you clean your eyes?
how do you juice fruit?
Stop forgetting birthdays and anniversary dates.
To remove the skin from a garlic clove,
To make a toy light saber made from 1 inch poycarbonate tubing glow from the inside out.
Prevent fleas in house.
How do I roll out the dough when making indian garlic naan?
To prevent corrosion on a starter motor
pliers
How can I keep sodas cool at a picnic?
How to eat for health
microscope
To rub scratches out of  a pair of sunglasses.
To make an easy pie seasoning,
To give the inner tube crow sturdiness so it can be posed and placed
How do you clean walls after removing wallpaper?
To open a box of kleenex,
Sneak alcohol bottle into event.
To make a bubble wand
How to Lose Weight by Eating Slowly
How to prevent streaks when cleaning hardwood floors?
how to save leftover wine
To cut the sides of a plank to the right size, you can
How do you wash ginger root?
To make popcorn flavored toothpaste,
How long can you store egg-less cookie dough before it goes bad?
gun
Is there a natural way to repel mosquitoes without using chemical sprays?
To affix a USB port to power wires, you can
to bring eggs back to cool temperature after pasteurizing
how do I shut off the water to my toilet?
To make water colder than it is when it is poured from the sink,
To open a rusty recipe box
grater
floss
how to make a portable lantern
10 How do I apply mascara
how to make cranberry nut stuffing
Inflate a boucy castle.
Unclog stuffy noise.
To allow a cake to cool,
How can I cure bad breath naturally?
How to make DIY sandbox.
Remove dandruff from your hair
How to practice well
how do you jingle keys?
Recover from a hangover.
To make the coating for candy apples.
How do you clean a potato?
How to prepare wood chips for smoking.
To join cardboard together
Make a rice heating pad.
Hang upper cabinets without having to hold their full weight.
Make Parmesan crisps
how do you recite something?
how do you reference something?
wooden chair leg
Seal paper to cardboard.
Secure backing board of barn door to frame.
To prevent a potato from drying out while baking it,
how do you pay for food at a drive thru?
How long should I make a magic wand?
To add a smoky flavor to homemade barbecue sauce.
Add extra grip to remove jar.
Tenderize raw meat.
Comfortable sheets
To mix pepper and juniper berries together, you can
To create a hole in wood for rebar to fit through, you can
What should you do if you are in a building in an earthquake?
How do you catch a fish?
use a wine opener
How do I clean my winter gloves?
How long should I workout each day
To return blended apples from a food processor to a pot,
How to toast sandwich.
How can I get just made fresh fries at McDonald's?
How do you prepare the fruit for a traditional sangria?
How do I make an omelet
What should I do once the copper pipe solder has cooled down when working on a plumbing project?
how to make a curried cauliflower sandwich
Catch drips from messy ice cream.
How can I zest a lemon?
How to sous vide a steak?
cardboard box
To fold the socks into a ball,
How to upcycle old clothes.
how to remove a switch trigger from a power tool
How do I garnish my baked pears after they are done baking?
How to clean your asphalt
How to make Chicken Macaroni soup
To cook diced onions in a frying pan on the stove.
how do you get on an airplane?
how do you sing karaoke?
How can I prevent acne?
How to make Peanutbutter Rice Crispy Fantasy fudge crunch at home.
How can I easily squeeze lemons without a citrus juicer?
how do you use a walker?
To make a cup of hot tea,
Can you sharpen old scissors easily?
To emphasize your anger or excitement during an online conversation,
Melt chocolate chips in a microwave
To highlight text in orange without an orange highlighter,
How do you cut wire down into smaller pieces?
How do you make lye water?
how to keep dark fabrics darl
jug
How do you win a Pokemon Battle?
How do you remove the stinger from a bee sting from your body with your fingers?
how to have shorter hair
Hang a bird cage from the ceiling.
how to prepare salmon for freezing
how do you log into your netflix app?
How to pierce your own ears.
To keep a pet mouse.
To save time when watching a long lecture or video on YouTube,
To carve a pattern into a privacy fence.
To cross cut pieces of wood to a specific size, you can
safety pin
To unscrew a stuck light bulb,
How can I shred sweet potatoes for a hash?
how do you prevent rust on bike chain?
How to add washer fluid to your car?
To make the best corn on the cob,
How to Make the Filling for North Carolina Lemon Pie
To strain yogurt.
Reduce chances of blisters from high heels.
how to make a bad decision?
How to make a box hard to store delicates?
how to mix cement
What's a way to take my dog for a walk?
To lower the bitterness of eggplant, you can
How do I cool down the meringues after they're done cooking when making pavlova cookies?
Deskin a roasted pepper on the stove.
To allow your chickens to have space to run,
To protect your skin from sun damage,
How can I display flowers in my home without a vase?
eye glasses
Soak white mugs.
how do you burp a baby?
How to attach LED light strip to car.
Prevent fly-aways and static in a hairbrush before grooming.
How do I remove excess slurry when making a concrete countertop?
To plug a device into a UPS.
make fries
how do you clean chalk outside?
Clean the pool
How do you keep spiders out of your bed?
pants
To make an easy pattern for the bodice part of a sleeveless dress.
Grill pork outdoors on a charcoal grill
how do you rinse off?
Remove snag from rug.
How do you prevent your sandwich from being stolen?
When filling metal molds, how do I ensure all the small voids are filled?
To hang wall art on a wall.
how do you reference something?
To deice your windshield
television
how to easily clean your blender
To create an easy stylus for your smartphone,
To seal the edges of homemade ravioli.
how do you put out a fire?
how do you use a stylus on a phone?
How is a bungee cord made.
How to seal a small crack in plastic?
box
how do you scan an item at self checkout?
How to measure doorway opening for cedar door.
To spruce up your yard in hardly any effort,
Apply mascara
To make boxes easier to carry
How to best knit using paper?
How to put a fitted sheet on a bed?
To hit the rest button on an electronic device,
When do I sand the car grille?
How can I easily view the items in my refrigerator without taking anything out (even the ones at the back)?
To change the color of a metal ring, you can
how do you navigate a car?
To restraigthen a bent PVC conduit.
How do you cut the leather for the shield?
shoes
How do I get my bedroom to smell better?
use a bowl of water to remove a ring
To store  freshly made whipped cream for the pumpkin pie bread for later use
To have a shopping list that is easily view able without paper,
How do I make my own windshield-washer fluid at home?
how to plump up lashes
To speed up the process of cooking food in restaurants,
How to remove ladybugs from your home without harsh chemicals.
To make it easier to draw an eye, you can
To sanitize a cooking surface,
board
To make glaze seep down into bread.
how do you get ash off of your skin?
Install hanging containers.
To make caramel, you can
What's the best material for a DIY walking stick?
How do I make a kite?
How to clean a curling iron.
How do I measure sugar when making cookies?
how to make pistachio nougat
easily hull strawberries
paper cup
How do you make a birdhouse roof?
What is the best material to use for a cutting board?
How do you get a pet to take their medication
What would you need to build a place for bees?
Prevent shoe laces from unraveling.
To preheat the oven,
stand
To make gravy, you can
sandpaper
how do you clean your cuticles?
To make a thin milkshake.
To make home furniture.
Prevent grass from growing through a sand pit.
how to get better flavor from a cookie dough
How do you disassemble scrub brushes?
Make hair for a dummy.
To cure bad breath.
Make a homemade slingshot
Provide a self-contained description.
What supplies are needed to build a treeless tree house?
To get games to play on your Raspberry Pi arcade machine.
Make a secret hiding spot
How can I get blackheads off my face?
glasses
How to get a Tinkerbell template for a pumpkin.
blanket
To make cookie crumbs, you can
To make a wooden table water resistant for a short time,
how to peel a potato by boiling away the skin
teeth
How to check if your child has a fever.
How to share awareness of the importance of honey bees with your friends and neighbors.
oil
To pleat a roll of toilet paper for your guests,
How to play hockey in Mars?
to make the Christmas tree earrings sparkle
How can I make Acne medicine at home?
To protect your home from home invasions,
How do you undo a daisy chain?
D.I.Y aged paper with used tea bags.
Get rid of a hickey.
To remove oil stains on a driveway,
One wants to remove rust from a metal object.
What kind of power can a person use when they want to be off the grid?
child
How do you make cinnamon sugar?
To remove an eyelash from your eye,
A coffee mug
Remove a hickey from neck.
how do you keep proper posture?
deep fried pickles
To remove skin from tomatoes for cooking the pizza
What kind of container to pickle cucumbers in.
Condition mind to eat less.
To keep socks easy to find in your dresser,
How do I deal with all the hair from a heavy shedding dog?
roller
To get plastic to easily make a finger stylus out of.
remove water rings on wood
To remove rust and tarnish from old metal fixtures,
sword
earring back
To remove the old strings from a guitar.
Keep small screws organized.
How to get rid of the black bars on the top or sides of the movie?
cardboard box
To blow your nose properly with good manners,
To measure granulated sugar into a cup,
How to stain the basic body of a wood guitar.
How can I create more distance from a water hose.
How do you pick up a biscuit with tongs?
Avoid motion sickness on a boat.
Determine if something is brass or gold.
What sort of iron is needed to complete the solar alarm?
To make a clay snake,
To open a pickle jar when it is stuck.
To deal with a hot climate you are not accustomed to, you can
Listen to someone in a loud environment.
blanket
Make a folder and pencil holder.
Organize a garage sale
how do you lock your iphone screen?
To mix other acrylic paints to create purple,
how to make fried rice
How do I make an instant coffee?
To measure a specific distance on a piece of wood, you can
how to keep your pipes from freezing in the winter
Make a baby video monitor.
To keep a worm farm moist what should you do?
how do you give a surprise party?
binder clip
Where can I see parrots
how do you edit something?
Block out street lamps when sleeping.
What can I use to stuff a sock monkey?
How to cook a steak
To remove permanent marker from wood
roll of wrapping paper
How do you make bone broth?
bed
how do you get a bachelors degree?
conductors
Drawing outline
How do I get drunk
How can you prevent burning your hands on your steering wheel?
how do you tell twins apart?
Remove cobwebs from walls.
To wrap yarn around an entire cable
brick
stove top
How do I thread a needle?
How to upvote a comment on Reddit.
To harvest the honey out of a honeycomb tray,
How can I prevent static cling on clothes when I'm out of dryer sheets?
Want to use a cute cable holder to organize your wires?
how do you put play dough away?
nail clipper
Dirt off floor
How do you separate an egg with your hands?
To make it easier to trace a pattern onto another piece of paper, you can
how to make a yogurt dip
How do I create the American flag pattern on the table?
how to get the most “meat” off a pineapple
How to Make Easy Donuts
How do you use clothes to look shorter?
how do you put toppings on a pizza?
how to temper batter
Stay asleep without distractions.
How do you cook an artichoke?
How can I make my own air freshener for my car?
To make a grilled cheese extra gooey,
tweezers
How to remove stains from teeth
wrench
How do I flatten the cookie dough balls ?
quickly chop herbs
How do you deep fry coke?
How long should I let paint dry for on a metal can?
In order to grind coffee beans,
tissues
To save money on products at the store,
Feed 6 people for under $5?
Remove lipstick stain from shirt.
table
how do you dig a hole outside?
How can I protect and make safe razor heads when not in use?
How to dry a shirt so it does not lose its shape?
When can I form wax?
How to make a human sized body shell.
Ignite a grill without lighter fluid for a cookout.
Remove dirt from suede shoes.
What is the best way to get dog fur off of my vest?
How to peel a banana?
How to make a pattern to trace and cut on a coin?
How to prepare a canvas for acrylic painting.
how to make light creamed corn
To be safe while using the phone while driving,
How can you get chewing gum off of clothes?
how do you use the notes app on an iphone?
How do i thin out thick nail polish?
To make purple food coloring, you can
How do I fold in dry ingredients to wet ingredients when making macarons?
vase
How can I find the end of masking tape easier?
Inviting people to a party
To attach a leather padding to wood, you can
How can I secure the top of the trash bag so it doesn't fall into the dust bin?
How to empty an ash tray
how to fluff feather pillows
How can you get rid of dust mites in pillows and bedding?
foot
Prevent waste of vegetable oil.
How to Care for Hamsters
How to make a chainsaw flash light or a gas powdered spotlight.
How can I cure glasses that have been painted with acrylic?
How do you see better while driving at night?
tupperware
How long should I cook french toast on each side?
How to Make Easy Microwave Caramels
In order to shape wire to make designs,
Clean scale of the inside of a tea kettle.
stabilize table
How to wash a pet dog
How can you get rid of something irritating that is in your eye?
To become sponsored as a skateboarder,
how do you get rid of frizzy hair?
What are some of the things you can do with beaded hair sticks?
To make a music stave bracelet,
How do I give a green healthy smoothie a nice green color?
To secure your home at night,
how to make chocolate shavings
Make SOS flag.
How to fix the problem of a slippery spot on the floor.
To tenderize and flatten a steak, you can
What can be used as a yeast dough incubator?
How can I keep mud from being tracked in the house?
How to make Lemon slushies at home.
make saffron rice
To make butter icing.
To keep meatloaf from falling apart when it's cooked.
How to cook pasta
how do you check if a cake is done?
how do you make hot water cold?
compact disc
how to clean red wine from carpet
To make a chocolate milk shake,
To power up a fan.
To screw in your supports for your baby gate,
Sharpen scissor blades.
If you  splash the sides with the sugar water  (if you do just wash the sides down with a pastry brush dipped in a little water).
how do you turn on the caps lock on a laptop?
How do you cook sugar beets to make beet sugar?
how to peel a dragon fruit
how do you master at something?
To make something shiny black
How to Make the Filling for a North Carolina Lemon Pie
To celebrate Easter with a fun family activity,
To fix a doorknob.
how do you open the sunroof on a car?
sleeve
Combine what two techniques to create a myfood gardening system.
how do you use concealer?
make homemade raisins
How to insert plastic triangles into brass rod.
Store markers and pens.
How do I chill the pureed bananas when making banana ice cream?
how do you review your work?
How to play a song in guitar?
How to make bourbon caramel sauce.
how do you brown ground beef?
Press flowers using the book press method
To win a series in the NBA playoffs,
How to sound better while singing
To mark a straight line on a plank of wood, you can
Remove cracked light bulb from socket.
When doing on a woodworking project, why is it a good idea to boil the wood?
How do I hide the screw heads when making a worm bin for apartments>
How do I bake clay for a craft project?
How to finish wooden cabinets after sanding.
How can I get an inexpensive way to organize items in the bathroom?
How do I cut circles of equal sizes from tissue paper when making a dotted lantern?
How can you keep doors from hitting the garage walls?
how do you declutter something?
To create a beer bottle opener.
how to cut bottles for drinkware
To ensure balloon doesn't tear when using it to protect iPod in pool.
How do I keep the glitter from making a mess?
People
Where can I buy a sheep
how do you dry a towel?
how do you get rid of tears on your face?
To avoid ruining a nice Halloween costume,
tweezers
how do you get rid of bags under your eyes?
how to smooth out frosting after the cake is frosted?
duct tape
Make a paint canvas for kids.
Reduce the risk of heart disease.
how to clean wood blinds
how do you use a bat?
To make a sauce have a lighter color and a smoother taste, you can
How can I get my dog to go to the bathroom outside more?
How to prepare fabric from a pattern to make clothing.
What type of ground beef should I select when making hamburgers
How do you sack the quarterback in football?
How to remove the seeds from a watermelon completely?
To round off the edges of wooden slats, you can
Bake cookies with sunlight.
To cook crusts without filling them to ensure they retain their shape, you can
To have healthy snacks easily available when travelling with kids,
To make Golden Milk sweeter without adding sugar.
Prevent finger prints on sink faucet.
How to carry lotion when travelling?
make makeshift apron
What is a good cheap way to wrap a bare metal knife handle.
To make pasta easier to eat for kids?
In order to start a fire,
To dry clothes faster in a dryer.
How to water plants effectively.
Catch drips from watering in door plants.
To prevent varicose veins,
To put a measured amount of liquid soap into a spray bottle.
How can I make more room in a kitchen?
Keep your rose bushes  healthy and blooming.
How can I decorate with Scrabble letter tiles?
hair pick
How do you make a pillow with a design you created.
Coat bits of dough for monkey bread.
What type of finish should you use on the handle?
how do you soak something?
To win a race,
bin
Garage parking aid.
How to use a mold release product
how do you find  the name of a song you like?
how to make a shirley temple punch
to repair worn out heel linings of your shoes
Make a stinky pair of shoes smell good.
To pack properly for a winter backpacking trip.
How should I freeze mozzarella sticks to prepare them for the deep fryer?
bin
How do I clean the shoelaces from my shoes once they are removed from my shoe?
To get an interception in football,
how do you delete a chat on facebook?
how do you hold breasts in place under a top?
ice pick
For a quick overnight trip, what should I bring camping?
How to sharpen pencil.
matches
water bottle
how to differentiate twins
how do you make a batch of something?
pen
How do I make my own essential oil?
How to mix wet ingredients.
how do you read brail?
bottle opener
How do you find the area of a Heptagon with an Apothem?
How to adjust the reach on your Sram brake levers
To cut a hole into the bottom of a can.
How can you make a new kitchen drawer bottom?
Make a wasp catcher.
To season french fries for eating,
how to make DIY muffin liners
Scrub hard bathroom stains.
Make multiple cheap cloth napkins.
Make mini lamp.
How to unplug a refrigerator?
To save money on packing materials,
logs
glasses
To protect your hands when working with jalapenos, you can
How can I apply eyebrow wax?
To put a hole in the bottle cap pendant to thread a chain or a string through.
sink
To provide financial security,
Create an Easter basket.
How can I keep eggs from sticking to a cup while microwaving?
Stay hydrated during a workout.
Prevent bar soap sliding.
To make an easy safe space for a baby to crawl in,
How do I mop the floors?
How to induce vomiting.
How to get teeth professionally whitened.
How do you make a wind chime out of shells?
Prevent child from buying and downloading on smart phone.
how do you take a break on something?
how do you wash a stove plate?
kindness
To remove the paper from the stamp block,
Catch dust from drilling.
Make portable cooking pot.
To toast seeds to be used in a recipe, you can
How to cut leather to size to use as a holster?
Soften butter quickly.
How to crack a walnut.
How do you look up words in an Arabic dictionary?
What do you do with bad smelling food?
Make automatic anniversary reminder.
How can I get rid of scratches and  marks on wooden furniture or items?
bake brie
To hold chopsticks
To break the seal on a tight lid of a jar,
how do you move a toy car?
flour
To secure a patch placed on denim for sewing.
Change the pitch of audio in VLC.
To trim away excess cord.
Avoid tears when chopping onions.
What if I have a pimple that is too painful to pop?
how to make a painted projector screen
How do I remove the seeds from a whole cranberry fruit?
To protect a sticker after writing on it, you can
How to reduce pain when wearing new shoes?
How can I clean my house keys?
how do you wear a flannel?
How to remove the Windows 8 default system shortcuts (like Recycle Bin) from the desktop.
saw
clay
To remove dust from your graphite drawing.
how to get dog hair out of carpet
To get the edges of pie crust to stick together.
how to peel a banana using monkey magic
How to fix a broken tennis ball for your dog to play fetch?
Clean rust from a piece of jewelry?
How to place magnets on license plate frame.
What are some steps to consider when applying to colleges?
How to fill garden beds.
To allow the cookie to firm up after cooking
towel
How do you get rid of hiccups?
To ripen bananas for cooking.
how to keep a clean toilet brush
How to flatten dough used for a pie crust.
If the nutella cookie batter is too crumbly
Remove rust from stainless steel silverware.
How do I use Steam-A-Seam to Adhere shapes to my no-sew collage pillow?
What can be stored in a red cedar drawer organizer?
How to Make a Simple Syrup to Make Chocolate Dipped Orange Peel
how do you use your hood on a hoodie?
To connect all the ties in a necktie skirt.
To save money on a big vacation,
How do you keep your papers from getting wet when it rains?
To age a paper scroll
Make a tote bag out of old pants.
What is the easiest way to make an ice cream sandwich at home?
how to make a clarifying shampoo
Make Keto buttercream
How to prevent sun burn.
What can you use as the planets in a solar system diorama?
To remove the nutella cookies from the cookie sheet after cooking
What can I use to help hold LEDs in place when soldering them to jewelry?
How do you trace a design onto would using a stencil?
What type of material should you use to make the werewolf head for a costume?
What step can you take to make grating ginger easier?
how do you fix dry eyes?
Cut a watermelon without a knife.
how do you avoid a flood?
What would one need to patch a screw hole in a wall?
How to I prepare the rice before starting to make kheer?
If a business has a "now hiring" sign there all the time, is that somewhere I should apply?
What are the best ways to store my tomatoes?
how do you alphabetize something?
how to season squash
Be a more responsible shopper
When is the best time of year to make a mango drink?
What is the best kind of hot glue gun to buy?
How long to bake your Nutella brownie?
To protect yourself when working with primer, you can
shoe
trowel
To clean a bathroom sink
To slice the cranberry cookie dough log
To safely mail trading cards.
how do you walk down a street?
How to Make Homemade Flavored Butters
how do you drink coffee?
What is the best way to reheat pizza?
To paint the bed using different colors to make it look like a bus.
To make your own brown sugar using molasses and sugar.
Which gluten free flour is best for baking?
To create a Facebook account.
wet towel
Pet your cat so he isn't angry.
To turn a can of refried beans into bean dip,
Avoid sneezing.
How do I clean Out the Inside of the Bamboo?
how to keep garbage disposal blades sharp
camera
How to prepare a chicken for oven roasting?
Reduce weight gain when eating.
How to Make a Non Toxic Wood Furniture Polish
To add a brim on the playing card top hat.
tablecloth
t-shirt
How do you remove corners of an octagon shaped ring to round it out?
How do I make block of wood feel smooth?
how can I make my door hinges stop squeaking?
How to color peacock feathers.
How can I boil potatoes on the stove?
Ice
scissors
To make your own long lasting temporary tattoo,
How to fit a TV to the wall in a rustic way?
what pan should I use to sear meats
Make flavored stirring sticks.
How to make Chocolate Caramel Tart at home.
To cleanly remove a price sticker from glass,
To improve the flavor of chili,
To make a lamp using plastic soda bottles safely.
To secure the layered balloons used in the stress ball.
handkerchief
What ingredients and utensils do I need?
how do you use a baby bouncer?
how to grind coffee beans
What kind of base material can be used for a cosplay gun?
Create a drip catcher for ice cream bar.
tomato
To seal the surface of a wood project, you can
microscopes
Add shine to leather shoes.
To bend a coat hanger to make a structure, you can
How to clean off dirt from sneakers?
How to Clean Ketchup, Pasta Sauce, or Barbecue Sauce off a Carpet
How to swat a mosquito biting your arm?
To get a car to handle better on ice and snow
To tie off the end of sausage casing for meat snack sticks.
What type of light bulb is best to use in a lamp made of a converted blowtorch?
To remove polish from an old metal fixture
oven
How to close a browser tab on Chrome
bake broccoli and cauliflower
screws
How to make plants look prettier?
How do you decide when to move a bee box over a small distance?
how do you keep dough from sticking to a pan?
To chop potatoes to the correct size according to how much you like them to be cooked
how to make an easy fire starter?
To make an easy carnita feast,
Absorb extra moisture on feet.
How can I add fat to venison steaks?
To prevent clothing from getting rained on without a raincoat,
Heal annoying itch without tools.
How to store a bicycle helmet?
Prepare toilet base for removal.
How to make a Straw Oboe
Increase productivity throughout the day.
To download new music when you can't afford to buy any,
How can I repair a coffee mug that has a broken handle?
To create easy fire starters,
how do you shut a gate?
To get an assist in basketball,
How can I fix a metal ring that has become snapped and no longer fits on my finger?
How do I get dirt to clean oily hands?
Cover car seats without spending money.
Save condiment space at a picnic.
How can I get rid of ants?
One seeks to travel with a lot of belongings.
to accommodate many birds at a bird feeder
how do you take a pregnancy test?
How do you open the hood of your car?
Adding supplies to container
To make a cedar oil rub for furniture.
To get a ring that is too tight off your finger,
How to pour beer from a bottle into a glass
Test an Egg’s Freshness
To prevent wires from touching other wires they aren't supposed to, you can
How do I remove cigarette smell from an electronic device, silicone material, or clothes?
How to speed up the cooking time of a spatchcock chicken on the grill?
How can I remove chicken from a deep fryer?
To protect your lungs when working with insulation, you can
wok
how do you panda a hit on amazon mechanical turk?
To make a rolled cake that doesn't break you need to
Drying Model Magic Clay to make Model Magic Texture Stamps
to find a suitable wood to make a cutting board.
To clean an NES cartridge.
how do you pray for someone?
To make a cat like medicine more, you can
to determine the center of 4x4 plywood
how do you put your hair ina ponytail?
How to check that dough for bread has risen to a proper size?
hand
To shape the wood so it fits in the Swiss Army knife as a toothpick replacement.
where is the constellaiton Piscis Austrinus located
To make a drink less spicy.
How to cut leaves off a plant?
How to Clean a Cricut Mat
To smooth out the inside of a wooden ring, you can
How to make Fluffy Slime
how to keep bugs out of kitchen drawers
How do you cut up a watermelon?
Improve quality of sleep.
How do I melt the chocolate when making creamy chocolate toffee torte?
To peel the grapefruit.
To install an application on a smart television
Increase moisture to kitchen air.
To wake up a sleeping body part that feels numb,
To write a good cover letter for your resume,
how to keep chicken prices down
How to easily clean a computer screen?
paper towel
blender
How to find a good book to read?
To make a pick for a guitar when there are no picks around.
divide a 8.5 x 11 piece of paper into three equal parts.
Tools need to make a pair of ninja climbing claws.
how do you talk to someone on a phone call?
To pronounce the infamous Windows ME.
How do I make the wood clean and smooth?
How to quickly dry out flowers for crafts and projects?
calculator
To prepare a cast iron pain for frying.
How to make holes for airflow.
To sort the Rocky movies in chronological order.
Make anti theft lunch bags that can prevent your lunch from being stolen or tasted.
Open a modern quartz movement watch to replace the battery.
To make inexpensive ski gloves.
Treat an annoying pimple.
To allow the now formed mushroom cookies to completely dry after icing
To remove the screws that are holding a motor together, you can
how do you heart a song on spotify?
Create an electrical arc.
How can I get my flattened pillow to plump up?
Store flower bulbs easily.
Once an avocado seed has grown roots and leaves, where can you plant it?
How to turn jeans into jean shorts?
How to clean a cast iron skillet safely.
How to make a simple firestarter without access to wood or paper?
glue
make hair grow
how do you scorch something?
To adhere a plastic stabilizer to fabric,
cool dog off
How do you prep yogurt for making cream cheese.
ocean 
How to evenly apply beeswax to shoes for waterproofing
To ensure the sugar dissolves while the liqueur ferments.
sponge
How do I inflate a helium balloon
How do I wash a car
how do you hunt an animal?
mittens
how do you put on a clip on tie?
To make the buckle part of the wooden belt buckle.
What toppings can be added to the top of a funnel cake?
statue
How can I get my hands to feel softer?
To make kitchen chrome appliances shine
tray
To remove air bubbles from paint, you can
oil
Trim a christmas tree.
how to refresh rice or pasta when reheating in the microwave
What are the basics that I need to start a garden?
Candy Ice cream cones
To get through to someone who's phone is on do not disturb.
To find a perfect circle within a piece of cardboard, you can
How do I make raspberry bark harden after I've put together all the ingredients?
To cut a smaller-diameter piece of PVC pipe.
Bake asparagus
To remove gum from your hair
How do you eat a pomegranate?
How to make teff starter?
How do I print the image on the waxy side of the paper?
To weave wire together for a wire harvesting basket, where should I start?
Make disposable paint tray liner.
When using bamboo for a tomato trellis,
to prevent a wood clamp from staining wood
How do I mud and tape the seams when patching a hole in drywall?
Where can I take a nap
To shoot a bow and arrow,
To prevent something from getting burnt while baking it, you can
Hold sheets of paper together while filing them.
How do I cook mushrooms when making a meat sauce from scratch?
When making homemade Altoids, how do I cut them into the correct size?
What materials are needed to make an origami crane?
how to create a small-space camp kitchen
To create a perfectly fluffy pancake,
wood plank
To make your own fire pit,
how do you switch things out?
how to make a mimosa salad
Where can I see butterflies
To keep your teeth and gums healthy,
To find large, circular shelving for DIY shoe storage.
How to enter theater mode on Youtube
To delete file in a computer
To melt soap into a liquid for molding
How do you slice a piece of bread?
Add slippery surface to snow shovel.
How to Get a Toddler to Sleep Alone
How do you get Lego that are stuck together apart?
how to store bread in the freezer
How do you prepare steel tubing for welding into shape to build a table?
To fill a salt shaker.
paintbrush
Store fishing rods.
rocks
Create a window in a room of your house.
What is a good way to amp up a childs learning while they watch their favorite shows?
Clean a basketball hoop backboard.
syrup
fingernail
how do you check behind your car from the front seat?
pan
To get your lips to not be so dry.
To make handling and rolling the dough for the super mario cookies easier
Make a hacky sack.
How do you prep a turkey for deep frying?
After taking the steering wheel out of the car, to make a steering wheel out of wood,
fill a muffin cup for cupcakes
sponge
counter
how to make mochaccino cocktail
How to downvote a post on Reddit
Use a mason jar to make a appealing drink.
how do you space things out?
How to make water balloons at home?
To preserve a bottle that a baby couldn't finish,
To convert Moroccan Stew into a vegan option
Make a crayon holder.
What is needed to make a 3d paper snowflake?
How can I stop a run in pantyhose from getting bigger?
How should you test if your model helmet will fit?
sofa
To spike the volleyball,
To draw circles on a piece of wood, you can
What is the best way to cut a watermelon?
how to get a more flavorful french fry
Petrify insect for collection.
How do you draw a coffin?
How do you paint with a spray can of paint?
How to glue metal sheet to the ledge.
make simple syrup without a stove
how do you keep bread fresh?
How can you keep babies from crying when you pick them up?
To attach shower liner to a plastic rod, you can
How do you connect two metal contact points?
water
To tighten a screw,
how to crush crackers
How to make the peanut butter cups low calorie?
How can I make a circle pattern on a piece of plywood?
To make a S'More,
How do you clean milk jugs before recycling?
To prepare pumpkin for roasting in the oven.
To cut up the cauliflower for cauliflower tortillas
To prevent scratches on antique china while storing them.
To cook instant cheesy potatoes.
How to make overnight oats?
What's a good place to look for discarded branches for a walking stick?
sponge
Add shine to hair.
To staple papers together.
To combine flour and cold butter for pie crust.
how to bring something closer to you?
How do I kiss someone for the first time?
foot
How do I make pasta salad
how do you hunch over?
Sew without a machine.
Open a bottle of wine.
how do you let your brain rest?
Mark child with contact information in case of an emergency.
To reduce the amount of waste you create,
How to draw a perfect circle on a work piece.
To ride a bike anywhere you want during the harsh winters.
how do you petrify someone?
what doe sposion ivy on skin look like
How to use a microwave
What ingredients will I need to make butter cookies?
How do I prepare the yeast when making croissants?
To answer the telephone,
Make a garbage disposal smell good.
Remove weeds from garden.
Remove moisture from feet.
To let wood season, or dry out, you can
How can you mount a new sprocket on a bicycle and what tools do you use?
quickly freshen a room
how to make corn and tomato salad
To keep track of the number of knots knitted while knitting even rows.
To move a stud into position on a piece of wood
To get router table to make curves on the corner of wood.
credit card
What steps should you take if confronted by a pair of Coyotes?
To wash blueberries,
How can you increase the shelf life of bananas?
What kind of saw is needed to construct a desk?
Purge clothing wardrobe.
how do you get rid of hair on your body?
Smoothing marks on surface of the stump.
To clean the dirt off of the driveway,
How can I declutter my home
tack
To make a hole in the side of a plastic bottle, you can
which salt is for finishing
wax
Activate the yeast.
Did the Greeks name the constellations that we refer to today?
roller brush
tennis ball
Cool down a dog.
what to use as a base for sauces
brush
To stop Plaster of Paris sticking to the mold.
To combine butter with other ingredients, you can
How long do I let the yeast feed when making rolls?
how do you sharpen your mind?
A crate
How to do Candy Chromatography
trash can
Draw a perfect circle.
To eat cheaply,
Remove excess salt from soup.
How do you remove wine stains from clothes?
paper clip
How do you put pasta into a pot of boiling water?
To prep the oven to make cookies and creme cookies
Where to buy Linux licenses?
ziplock bag
tie
Fix cracks in floor.
Apply melted chocolate to whole strawberries
How do you make a veggie sandwich?
To cook pasta, you can
rope
Increase Wi-Fi signal.
To hang towels with re-purposed items.
Keep wine cool without ice.
flour
how do you condone something?
how to make bacon, egg, and blue cheese toast
How to change a dogs diaper
What acid do you add to heated milk to make mozzarella cheese?
machine sander
How do you recycle water bottles?
Adding the comic to the frame
To make a young baby or toddler laugh,
How to ensure the meat filling in a bread roll does not escape?
Make dripless ice pack.
To protect an object from getting wet in a rain storm.
How to make artificial flowers smell like chocolate?
newspaper
lounge
How to help a toddler learn their colors.
Where can I see lots of artwork
To mix flour and sugar together, you can
How to bread a chicken cutlet
How do you bend wood veneer?
To remove the skin from a fish, you can
How long do butter cookies stay good after making them?
how do you wear a seatbelt?
How was the shape of a Tomahawk decided?
how do you keep a child in a carseat?
How to glue paper flowers together.
How to keep calm when it storms.
How to make a trash bag a rectangle?
How to make ice cream without an ice cream maker.
how do you close the gas tank in a car?
To cut a piece of metal rod to the size of a ring, you can
To attach a sheltering tarp to a bike basket
fingers
To keep hands free while travelling in public, without compromising your style,
Remove a label from a jar in a non toxic way
What can I use for pressure to glue things together if I don't have any clamps?
How do you create the ripple effect in the sand for Japanese Zen Gardens?
rubber band
telescope
comic book drawings
how do you eat weed edibles?
To get pre-cut wood to create your own shelving for a closet if you have limited carpentry skills.
To remove bubbles from silicone that has been poured into a mold.
how to provide traction when your tires are slipping
How can I improve the water flow of a simple watering can made from a plastic jug?
To add grip to metal plumbing pipes for costume props.
How to hit a golf ball further?
To keep your pens organized on your desktop
how do you eat an ice cream cone?
Make a high color buck drink
To bend a brass rod when making jewelry.
To reduce your chance of a fall during the night,
How thick should a table top be for a homemade table?
How do I clean my gym bag?
open a stuck jar
To remove odor from refrigerator
To open a bottle of mountain dew,
What does a green light mean for traffic
Vacuum tiny items.
Display a snowflake craft project prominently.
Sanitize dirty shoes.
How to prepare rainwater for cooking or drinking?
Open a jelly jar that is stuck shut using a rubber dish washing glove.
How do I create a Reddit account
how to remove iron from your water
How to make magnetic slime
To prepare the cheese to add to the zombie burger
After baking a pie in the oven, you can
To make a pastry bag,
pot
To prepare the maple wood for the tray file project
How can I make small round cookies without a cookie cutter?
To keep plastic shopping bags organized.
To tell your right and left ear buds apart without looking
How to make a template for a custom cardboard hat.
how do you track a bear?
Easiest way to remember something
What's an easy way to catch fruit flies?
What materials and tools are needed to make a day of the Dead mask?
To close up your pores after shaving in the shower,
how do you invite people to a wedding?
How to make a heating pad.
How do you prep sushi rice prior to boiling it.
How to make a pie crust that is ready to roll out to make an apple pie.
chip clip
how to unflatten a pillow.
What fabric do you need to make a windproof beach tent?
nails
To attach feathers to the end of a stick for a bow
Make temporary bed for baby.
To divide dough into multiple pieces, you can
trees
To prepare a pumpkin to use for cooking, you can
How can I ask for help in Danish?
How to chop an onion?
How do I prepare the saffron when making kheer?
use baking soda to wash veggies
bucket
make coffee table
How can I keep my bobby pins together?
razor
Find best seats for sound in movie theater.
floors
how do you skin onions?
two forks
To turn down the volume on the radio,
What ingredients are needed to make a cake pop?
cards
how to remove a virus from your computer
How to give the head some extra support while sleeping?
How to change a dirty diaper
To make a preparation of hummus friendly to vegans, you can
marker
To add small pieces of wire to a thicker length of metal, you can
Separate an egg using a plastic water bottle
How do you protect cranberry plants from weeds?
To preheat the oven,
tin foil
How to make muffins.
Glue stones together
how do you withdraw money at a bank?
Get the meat out of the pecan shell
How to put shaving cream on your face
How do I put down references for a job
Recycle newspaper and use in garden.
how to kick bloody mary's up a notch
sponge
how to water a tree?
To get a piece of parchment paper,
Remove onion smell from fridge.
To make canvas shoes into closed toe sandals.
chainsaw
Make recycle magazine holder.
how do I repair a rusty cast iron pan?
self watering pot
How to Make a Peach Fuzz
I heard that dogs are allergic to chocolate, is this true?
Keep packed hot dog fresh.
how do you use an elevator?
Cut a slot into the end of the wood.
how do you pay for a city bus fare?
Shelf
To make chicken salad usable for sandwiches
food processor
To cut a metal rod into two, equally sized smaller pieces, you can
How to cut wooden sticks to the width of sand paper.
To create your own sanding block, you can
bottle
staple
To help seasonings set in chicken before cooking.
To make the best nachos ever,
rolling pin
To put the finishing touches on a magic wand
To paint a doll with something that resembles blood, you can
Jet gasoline
how do you clean your tongue?
To make crepe batter the right consistency.
To roll out the pierogi dough and cut them into pierogi rounds.
How do you remove seeds from a watermelon?
How can I keep feet dry without water proof shoes?
How do I prepare the piping bag when making pavlova cookies?
To soak up the drippings from the sausage in a pan
To cut the end of a metal post.
How do I make the file into the shape of a knife.
how do you order food at a restaurant?
To make two ingredient Nutella Mousse
To prevent your roof from leaking,
how do you whisper to someone?
How to easily remove the flesh from an avocado?
How do you remove the heavy rust from the wheelbarrow?
Remove toilet clog.
To grind herbs, you can
how do you use a sprinkler outside?
groomer
Making the tropical Juice pops.
To make green paint, you can
How to Make Biscuits and Gravy
To make each side of a piece of wood smooth and even in thickness, you can
To hide jewelry in your bedroom.
how do you use a stethoscope?
washcloth
how do you run?
jar
To dry pieces of wood that have been glued together,
Heat up two sauces in one crockpot.
how do you prefer something?
To trace a circle, you can
Keep small parts organized during furniture assembly.
To adhere the fondant to each other
Prevent eyeshadow from falling on cheeck.
To eat a healthy chicken bowl.
TO make a ham and turkey sandwich,
Bake a pie in the oven
Table runner
To dry wet hair easily
How do I create an Instagram account
To proof your yeast prior to baking a loaf of bread.
How do you create the circular shape for a wire-based jewelry ring?
What to do with nutritional yeast flakes?
use mouthwash
how to keep berries from turning to mush
One wants to make sweet cookies to consume.
Store cotton balls.
How can I stay up all night without drugs?
how to make japanese radish salad
To make a mason jar salad,
refrigerator
how to sear effectively
How do you replace a frame full of honey with a new, empty frame in your bee box?
remove permanent marker stains
How to tie a ballet shoe ribbon
strainer
How can I make my candle burn slower?
To glue Ferrero Rocher candies to tissue paper squarest to make a decorative wine bottle.
Learn how to monitor heart rate.
How to prepare wooden legs.
Can you drink psychedelic milk?
How would I use a Sharpie to draw on a Batman mask made of duct tape?
Remove smell from sneakers.
Finishing the top of a log slice table.
A concrete porch/ patio can be cleaned how?
To tell if an egg is fully cooked or raw
cook sweet potato in toaster oven
use steel wool to clean the pipe
how do you bundle something?
paper towel
How do I make sure that the cookies are all the same size?
Add wheat to compost.
What type of tomato should I add to ground beef when making meat sauce?
To create graham cracker crumbs, you can
What supplies are needed to make a tissue box out of a shoe box?
How ot make bagel pizza
Disinfect sponges at home
To fix frosting when you've mixed it wrong.
Running shoes
How to switch on a laptop?
people
How do I prepare the area to build a sun room addition to a house?
To prepare vegetables for cooking.
How to travel to Mars?
How do I seal shoes that I painted?
how do you use a parking meter?
To combine two kinds of flour together before mixing with the other ingredients in a recipe, you can
Keep track of loaned items.
How do you clean a cast iron skillet?
how to cook macaroni
How to produce clean urine to tan salmon leather.
how to make hazelnut brownies
How do you feed a honeybee to help it recover?
Remove smell from garbage disposal.
How to change the light bulb on the lamp when needed?
To make a simple jig
how do you use a lifejacket in water?
How to Write and Publish a Children's Picture Book
Can you feed wild ducks without harming them?
One needs to power their green waste disposal.
Create multiple cleaning rags.
Paint a the outside of a large shed.
tablecloth
To separate egg whites from egg yolks, you can
wood
knife
How can you avoid being affected by Poison Ivy?
How to light incense
Stand straighter
egg carton
How do you make an apple bird food?
To Share a link with friends.
To stay more focused in a room while studying,
To make tomato sauce.
Set up a folding chair.
how can you run a bath
bleach alternative
How do you cook salmon?
what to do with leftover grease and fat
To press a dough into a cookie sheet, you can
How to break up brown sugar clumps
How to make homemade seat belt for your car?
Need the light of a lantern, but only have a small headlamp?
how to make sugar plums
To blend in polymer clays in different shades of red.
how do you make a car stop?
Fire blanket
how to put on a shirt?
blender
How do you cure concrete?
How do you remove weeds quickly?
To heat up wax to prepare it for candle making
To keep your ability to see in the dark when entering a well lit space,
paint
Make your own Zero waste toothpaste.
Get the dust off the ceiling near the ceiling fan.
How to floss teeth.
how to make pesto mussels
how do you put socks on?
how to make fire lighters
rags
Remove dead bugs from car windows.
Process dough in food processor.
To make strawberry jam,
What can I add to my eggs to make them more flavorful?
How can you stop water from foaming when cooking?
Make french toast muffins
What should you do if you see a large truck slow down suddenly when driving along the road.
how do you post pay a pizza delivery order?
Covered in sand after a day at the beach?
How to curl your hair.
To relieve a migraine with fruit juice,
How can you rewire your brain into being more happy?
how do you form a runon sentence?
how do you shorten something?
Avoid splitting an electrical cord.
What supplies are needed to make an inexpensive wig?
grater
how do you give a thumbs up?
kitchen towel
water and soap
To keep a cocktail cold without watering it down,
To clean a blender without soap,
weights
How to clean a plate?
a chain saw
To mix cement to pour into a mold
How do I get a lug nut off of my tire?
How to make a magazine rack.
How to refresh a website on Chrome
Turn your hair red.
How to store wood so it doesn't get damp in the water?
How can you avoid a ticket if you are speeding and suddenly come upon a policeman?
To heat up water in just one minute,
How do I clean a high fan?
Make grilled cheese toast.
Make a pizza stone.
how do you cast something to your tv?
Warm up water when camping.
how do I make avocado wasabi dressing?
How can you limit soap usage?
Creating your designs on the cakes
how do you split something?
How to attach decorations to a home made skateboard.
Make a leg support for bed time, to take pressure off of your back.
barrel
how do you make a caper herb dressing?
To clean dirt and grease from white paint,
To mark a line to cut on a metal trash can, you can
To stay warm in a rain storm,
How do I clean my car tires?
how to make coocnut-almond cocoa
how do you position something?
dice
How do I store my digital photos and know they are safe?
To carve the main shape of a knife out of wood, you can
How can I stain a piece of paper using tea.
How to make keychain out of zip tie.
mold
To dry meat out without a fire to smoke it on,
pumice
How to make a simple hand warmer.
To see all the clothes in your drawers
Prevent time checking during execrise.
Glass mug with handle
To remove stuck on food from counter tops,
Keep weak plants standing.
how do you pay for something
What tools are needed to make a natural wood table?
how do you like a picture on instagram?
How to groove the edges of leather.
vise grips
How to keep it from clumping?
What is a good oil to use when deep frying a turkey?
To store your winter blankets,
How to clean a hammock after use?
clamp
How do you prepare for a snowstorm?
How to Use Hair Conditioner Around the House
To protect the paint on a cosplay costume.
To cut a perfect circle out of a piece of fabric,
To remove expired registration stickers from your car easily,
How to collect dust from a small corner?
Make a body scrub to remove dead skin.
how do you send money to friends using the chime mobile banking app?
how to keep pasta from sticking
the best way to cook asparagus
Carve a funny face into an apple.
Make peach cobbler in a jar
Fix broken eyeglass frame.
Cutting the milk carton
Best way to drill into PVC pipe
How to prevent static on clothing from the dryer?
Remove stuck ringer finger.
how do you ask siri to do a task?
To cut drywall to size, you can
Video cameras
How can I dough in a circle shape?
To quickly find nails and studs below a wall,
How to sand unfinished wood.
how to make chocolate balls?
How to avoid newspaper ink on one’s fingers
How do I cook the red beans when making red bean paste for mooncakes?
Organize your sheets
To create a reflective backing for light box.
How to thread a needle.
umbrella stand
record
how to load a glue gun
How can I change my password from another phone?
how should I store fresh ginger?
How to prevent muscle pain during a workout?
what to use for a moisturizer?
To cut onions to survive the caramelizing process.
To make bread rolls crust a little soft.
How to quickly dry a material bag?
wrangler
To wake up in the morning after a long night.
How do I wash my windows
how do you wear a collar?
Avoid distractions during naps.
To help the thread slide through the fabric,
how do you start a tea kettle?
How do you know if you should clean your video game cartridge?
Supply power to your drill.
how do you know you caught something on mturk panda?
Make easter eggs.
How to make sunny side up eggs
How to get a pizza crisp on the bottom at home?
Choose some suitable paper.
Make brown sugar.
How to paint the box for a solar air heater?
Make a Turkey decoration.
To start writing a book.
how do you condition a runner?
How to be a good role model.
Prevent sticky dough fingers.
How can you make monster spray that will repel monsters in your kid's room?
How can I remove the black plastic part from a cd case?
Create back rest for sink repair.
box
Use strawberries and baking soda to whiten teeth
To find where the metal studs are in you wall are before drilling.
how to fix split ends
To bend a coat hanger into a desired shape, you can
how do you charge a laptop?
How to I get leaves in my yard into a pile?
metal tray
Increase energy at night.
To report a stolen vehicle to the police,
how do you chizzel snow?
What else should I add to a peanut butter and jelly sandwich to change it up?
How to open a soda can
How to Assemble Crispy Ground Beef Tacos
To block someone in a basketball game,
To create a grip on black PVC cosplay batons.
How to release an item from a zip tie.
To cut measured lines out of a t-shirt, you can
How to cut cardboard sheets.
How to secure yarn when knitting?
How to prevent a car licence plate from being damaged or stolen?
razor blades
how to hold screws on your drill bit
How to remove the flesh from a watermelon?
How do I paint the surface of the fridge door.
How to sweeten chocolate without making it too sweet?
To heat vinegar in the microwave
How do I fix the wires on the cardboard ?
soften butter
How to get cake out of pan.
how do you craft something?
How do I prepare the pie plate when making caramel brownie pie?
To make sure water condenses into the cup in the center.
How to make Banana Ice cream at home.
How can you get an Umbrella in a downpour?
To encourage good service at a restaurant,
Getting the paper to adhere to the rocket body of my paper rocket.
Will it taste funny?
To improve your eye sight,
To remove the inflated balloons from inside the wrapped yarn,
whisk
How to Make Fried Chicken
Fix a broken coffee mug.
how do you administer a shot?
How do I get my face to be clearer?
How do I prepare a coffee maker to get cleaned?
To dry shoes
How to search by voice on Google with Chrome
To see the stars with a telescope.
oven
What should I do if I hear a train-like noise coming from my wood stove?
how do you use a car?
how can I see the Gemini constellation
jar
How can I remove an oil-based paint stain from my clothes?
What is the best way to add Churros dough to hot oil for cooking.
How to light a joint
Once you have filled a sinkhole with concrete and sand what additional steps can you take to stabilize it?
To disassemble a keyboard.
make lemon rice
To make spikes in the plastic of a 2 liter soda bottle.
To listen to music without other people hearing,
how to freeze avocados
To make a suns cream if you are out of it,
To set the Twix cake once the layers are assembled.
To prevent a Bamboo mast from cracking in the sun
shot glass
To prevent a shower curtain from becoming moldy,
tumbler
Remove shirt wrinkles quickly.
How to chop angel food cake.
how do you match something?
how do you get someone out of a baseball run?
To pull a nail out of board,
To thread a needle using a needle threader
What is the best thickening agent to use in a green smoothie recipe.
How can I move around my shop vac with one hand?
bend a screwdriver end to replace belt prong
Make shaped inserts for cakes
Avoid getting struck by lightning.
To make easy, homemade cheese,
Make splinter removals less painful.
How do you glue canvas?
Cook multiple eggs.
To make a chocolate milkshake,
Lock your keys in your car?
how to search online for information?
How to build the base ship of your workshop?
To polish leather that you will use to make a wallet
How to open a capped bottle.
What is the best way to connect or have a difficult conversation with someone?
how to quickly destem herbs
How to use Pam to get rid of soap scum and hard water stains?
How do you remove stains from a shirt?
To cleanly separate a section of metal pipe, you can
Add shine to gift bag.
How to prevent failure of writing something in the wrong size on a cake?
how to say one minute nonverbally?
Prevent crumbles from hamburger bun.
Metal clip
To flatten a piece of wood, you can
How can I brighten up decorative candles?
How to make Pineapple Fantasy fudge at home.
cleaver
To smash up Oreos to put in ice cream.
Iron clothes quickly.
Remove crust from grill.
To keep your head phones from blowing out,
How to get rid of a headache.
To get one liter of elderberries
salt
How to make pasta sauce great.
how do you wave at someone?
What can I use to sketch
One wants to lower their cable bill.
How to polish the nut ring after shaping it?
paper towel
How do I fix dough that is too wet?
toothpaste
How to snooze an email on gmail
How to batter an eggplant slice.
how do you race someone?
oil
One seeks to have an earthy feel to their bedroom.
How do I feed my pets?
oracle
How to fix a dried out cutting board.
How to heat yarn.
mug
To spread out spoonfuls of cookie dough.
To keep pantyhose runs from getting worse.
Prevent makeup from running.
pine shavings
slingshot
How can I safely cut sheet metal with a hacksaw?
How do you cite an article title?
to drink quickly?
What is an easy way to chop onions without tearing up?
how do you graduate high school?
How can you boost your test score?
How to shoo away birds?
How to summer proof your grass.
When gluing a piece of wood to the back of frame, to ensure the glue sets, you can
Draw a large circle on a large piece of fabric.
how to make creamy garlic butter sauce
To make your house smell fresh when you've run out of cleaning supplies.
How do you boil water?
To make gingerbread spice
To get a comic book idea published,
Is genetically modifying DNA the same as what breeders and horiculturalists have been doing for centuries?
How to clear a sink clog
screws
To kill hornets in a hornets nest,
projector
net
How to calculate dimensions of lamp.
What can you use as the base for a LED plant growing light.
How can you get a bird to exit your house?
Prevent shoulder bumps in sweaters.
How do you make lemon juice?
Clean your shower head.
Learn to identify different bird species.
teeth
To bake cookies in a car without using the engine,
coin
How can you develop a habit that will make it impossible to ever lose your gas tank cap?
How to sew end of shirt sleeve to make a bag.
forks
To get your pants to fit you better in the length.
To coax the dog into the yard once he's run away.
How do you make sure a game retains its value?
Prevent onions from rotting quickly.
rubber band
How Do I Clean a Panini Maker?
Water
How do I add some rigidity when making an industrial frame?
How should one measure flour based off this recipe?
how to make green eggs and ham
To keep your razor from rusting
Home made shoe polish.
How can I get a good photo of a stranger, when they ask you to take their pic?
To travel with children on a road trip,
Put a Lazy Susan turntable inside of a kitchen cabinet.
How can I mark my spot in a book?
use nail polish to keep a button on
What is the best way to brush the hair of a dog?
To get pepper juice out of eyes.
How to Make Key Lime Tartlets
Prevent mildew on shower door.
how to remove wallpaper
What materials are needed to make dip dye ombre curtains?
Effective Study Techniques
What supplies are needed to make Easter inspired candle holders?
To keep kids and pets from constantly moving your rugs.
How to simmer habanero pepper in chili.
how do you add a friend by snapcode on snapchat?
To improve the flavor of spaghetti noodles,
What material can I use to make a metal cloak pin?
can
To remove hair from a clogged drain,
clamp
To hammer in a nail without hurting your fingers.
How to keep bra shape while gluing rose petals on.
A water float
How can you make Nutella Fudge Ice pops at home?
To unclog a clogged spray nozzle,
To crush the oreos for the cookies and cream popcorn
Bake an asparagus tart
How can I reduce my acne?
Clean cast iron
brick
How do you transfer potted plants to a new planter?
To store your holiday decorations,
How do you build an upcycled sewing station?
Make organic paint.
How can you tell if a product you are shopping for at Target is at it's lowest price?
make popcicles creamier and healthy
Prevent slamming cupboard doors.
To make a homemade guitar pick.
Vacuum a floor.
typewriter
How do I create a Tinder account
To prevent the inside of the cinnamon bread from leaking out when slicing
To get a car to come to a stop.
To make a rue
Toss away rotten eggs.
How do you finish the surface of a reclaimed wood sign?
How to frost a cake.
How would a person attach a magnet to a compact or other piece of makeup?
spatula
Make quick pickled vegetables
Brush teeth with food.
How to boil ingredients.
Soften butter fast.
To score a design onto a small piece leather.
how do you scratch someones head?
How do I easily carve a block of wood into a rounded bowl shape.
When combining wet and dry ingredients when making indian garlic naan,
how do you clip something?
Stop glued on beads from sliding off a glass wine bottle
To pour silicone into a bucket to create a mold of an object
linens
How to dry herbs at home
how can you use a dryer sheet to clean soap scum?
What do you need to make a reverse glowing jack-o-lantern?
What can I use to hammer in a nail if I don't have a hammer?
coolers
What is a quick fix for a running toilet
To easily remove mud from boots.
Prevent sleep paralysis.
How to avoid getting Watermelon juice on cheeks when eating watermelon.
how do you get rid of split ends in your hair?
To raise cows.
Increase shelf life of milk.
To air smoke out of the house while cooking,
how do you know you got a text on your phone?
Stop loud noise from door hinge.
How can you make a steadying sort of rack in the back of your truck?
Add additional lighting to your room.
How to make Blueberry bubble cobbler at home.
Make a frosting piping bag.
How can you get a bag of product that is stuck in the front of the vending machine?
Prevent salt clumps in shaker.
Recycle wire hangers
How to make lemonade.
How do you clean paint splatter off a sliding glass door?
vise grip
How do you dust a cake with icing sugar.
To attract and remove fruit flies from a living space,
tarp
To find an oil that does not come from animals.
how do you pick at something?
What do I do when my pants keep falling down?
Make peppermint sugar
How long do you have to cook the ricotta for?
Secure items at the beach.
make breakfast popcicles
To collect the fat from from boiled milk, you should
What's the most efficient way to dice an onion using a knife?
What color of paper should I use to make origami tulips?
how do you put fake nails on?
Create a spectrum of light using a prism
how to make chicken mole tacos
how to clean my shower curtain?
To store homemade butter and protect it, you can
D.I.Y clay with cornstarch and baking soda.
To find honey when out in the wild,
To make a scavenger hunt activity for a party,
What can I do if I cut myself shaving?
What do I do if I dont have any food coloring to color frosting?
How do I get soft butter if I forgot to take it out of the fridge ahead of time?
how do you run a race?
Deter spiders from breeding in garden.
Clean up ashes.
To combine lemon juice and condensed milk, you can
mirror
Sharpen your scissors
How to open control panel in Windows 10.
Treat heat burn.
Prevent taco spills.
How to make banana chips.
To fill a jar with colored salt for decoration
To fry potatoes a second time for a crispy exterior,
To clean used upholstery leather.
chopper
Why should you reuse engine parts in your home?
To carve a design on to a block of wood, you can
Make portable seasoning containers.
Hunt a deer.
newspaper
how do you band something together?
To become conscious during your dreams,
Prevent taco meat from spilling.
Prevent snow from getting inside gloves.
How can I neatly organize my purses in my closet?
how do you win at paper scissors rock?
paper clip
how to sanitize a marble counter top
Make a blooming onion.
Hide jewelry in bedroom wall.
make sweet and sour dressing
How do you boil water??
How do you make thin curved metal pegs straight?
Relieve anxiety with self acupuncture.
To dry out a soaked iPhone
how to dribble behind your back
How to check the battery level on Windows 10
How to Make Fertilizer from Banana Peels
Get rid of smoke smell in room.
To make it easier to paint a board,
Cardstock
To paint paper mache
Archive business information.
Fix tight sunglasses.
To trim excess branches off of a tree,
How to mircowave a hotpocket?
Enhance the effect of cannabis.
Where can I buy medicine
how do you check in to a hotel?
how to ripen a mango
Darken black clothing.
how do you keep someone from getting in your house?
hoe
stencil
Mix the chocolate chips and butter how?
To get your cat to stay off of the kitchen counters.
How to attach a magnet on to a metallic rod?
How to quickly cool a batch of donuts?
How do you make a paper leaf?
How to Make a rubberband ball at home.
To find decaying mushrooms, you can
box cutter
To make egg whites fluffy.
Protect yourself from cleaning chemicals
How to make sun tea that is sweet?
When do I know when the pancake is cooked ?
how do you prove you're you at an airport?
How can you sharpen and extend the life of your personal razor without dis assembling it?
How to cosplay.
vise grips
To sweeten chili, you can
How can I keep pie dough from sticking to the table and the rolling pin when rolling it flat?
What does dimming print color in a print indicate for the printer?
How to ensure that the elf ears color matches one's own ears?
To purchase electronics and furniture at cheap prices,
To help homeless people in your town,
how do you clean your nose?
How to roll met with bacon.
Make animal shapes with the pancake batter.
To build home furniture.
sand paper
computer
how do you clean up excess glitter?
Make slow cooked pulled pork.
how do you wipe after using the restroom?
how do you get rid of a scab?
To make a natural souvenir,
pressure cooker
To ensure that a comforter is wrinkle free, you can
To make american flag shorts, the best paint to use is
Pull-start a lawnmower.
beater
Ripen fruit faster.
how to keep pillows clean
wash cloth
How do you keep homemade bread crusty?
How can you keep ice cream from becoming hard after you open it?
How to Treat Cyanobacteria or Blue-Green Algae in an Aquarium
To turn a sheet protector into a stencil to be used with spray painting.
how do you get rid of a spider?
Pack a still hot hair iron.
make a disinfectant
Wants to find the right material for a large dinosaur skeleton costume.
To attach a log to a board so you can more easily run it through a table saw
To apply vinyl lettering to a interior wall,
tissue
how do I make salmon quiches?
To create a fold in a strip of leather, you can
How do I clean off the woods in my golf club set?
syrup
Invisible fences
How glue together the pieces of laminate to make the guitar pick ?
how do you eat french fries?
How to mop a floor.
Make a neat trash container for your car.
how do you blackmail someone?
How do you remove red wine stains from furniture?
To make homemade Cadbury creme eggs,
How to re-use old newspapers in your raised garden beds.
One wants to build an outdoor shower.
To make your eyes appear brighter,
What do I do if my semolina mixture is too dry when making basbousa?
To tell when baked goods are done baking, you can
sandpaper
How can I keep my gun safe from my kids?
burn ant
drill
How do you mix concrete?
how do you post a tweet?
coffee table
To make Strawberry Dipped Ice Cream Bars dairy free.
Make slime that can be eaten
how to avoid paint bleed under your masking tape
Make wall organizers.
To scrub dirty dishes without a hard sponge.
how do you wash cast iron skillets?
How can I keep toes separated while painting my toenails?
Keep clothes clean when working on crafts.
Preparing a Banana Milkshake Hair Mask
How to mix cupcake ingredients.
how do you clean fruit?
What is the difference in the way a girl mounts a bicycle and the way a boy does?
Dry my clay sculpture slowly to prevent cracking prior to firing in the kiln.
how do you turn off a light?
How to I make natural toilet bowl cleaners?
Reduce appearance of a skin bruise.
paint
To keep your toilet plunger off of the floor and still keep your bathroom looking classy.
sand paper
To cut an avocado without touching the flesh,
How to make the perfect Ground beef meatloaf
To store cake to keep it out of the way.
rolling pin
To reheat food,
To assemble the magnet design,
light
To easily organize headphones inside your purse and avoid tangles
To use a cookie press to make Minnesota cookies
Using redbox?
how to make satay chicken
How to Prepare SKittles Candy for Candy Chromatography
Learn to Dumpster dive.
Where can I buy scuba gear
How to remove the skin from a tomato?
Sand the wood down with 80-grit sandpaper.
To remove lint from clothes,
How to eat an apple
How can I keep floors safe while painting?
Are there other trees besides maple trees that you can tap for maple syrup?
How can I get to the city without a car?
What is the best way to heat the solvent?
Clean off dirty reclaimed wood.
To smooth down the outside of a homemade ring.
How can I get my shoes to smell better?
Test out rain protection of new home.
To crush the garlic needed for the mac and cheese
Clean a bell pepper for cooking
how do I make cherry crumb bars?
how do you scratch an itch?
how do you get soil off your shoes?
maeka goldeneye drink
To purify tap water.
Collect cookies off tray without smashing.
How to dry clothing from the washer.
To make yogurt
What can be used to seal the gumball machine tightly so that no water escapes at all while make a gumball/fish tank?
how do you blossom?
How can you mix concrete at home?
axe
To attract honeybees to your garden,
how do you get pumpkin seeds from your pumpkin?
How to make frosting.
How do you eat yogurt?
to be unfriendly?
Secure clothing when ironing.
To find a tree topper for Driftwood Christmas Tree.
how to dig a hole with a shovel.
To kill ants building a home on your property,
to make a cover for a tissue box
How to make popcorn on the stove.
To create rubber tubes for weaving,
someone's shoulders
How to make cake mixture.
cook your cinnamon rolls
how do you put cream on your sking?
To secure the knot,
How to prep potatoes for hash browns before frying.
how to make perfect coffee
How do I temper the mixture of eggs and milk when making vanilla souffles?
How do you make a Self-Watering Terrarium?
To use beer to marinate a steak, you can
How do you treat a bite from a Boa Constrictor?
How to make a dry ice implosion
knife
shovles
what should i mix with scrambled eggs for a good meal?
What can I mix with wood glue to make a shaded wood putty.
how to cook chicken breast evenly
How to make a simple flag for the backyard?
how to charge your phone faster
To finish making the key lime pie by filling the pie crust with the clear filling.
To identify female blue crabs to harvest crab roe.
make a bird cage.
Disinfect your sponges
How to make a cookie/cake/pie.
To neutralize food that is too salty,
To relive moments from a wedding more easily,
Make cheap pinwheels for your garden.
To store cleaning supplies in a laundry room,
clean slice a hard boiled egg
pan
To keep ice from melting without a freezer,
how to clean your dishwasher
To unclog a sink drain using boiling water,
How to tape the stripes on the flag.
fire
To evenly coat the cookies and cream popcorn with candy melts
How to make a decorative paper chain.
how do you slice something?
How do I get nail polish off of my nails?
keep bananas from browning
how to find the circumference of a circle
To ensure that you draw a straight line, you can
napkin
buy new car
How do I prep the oven to bake pizza?
To ensure the Parrot Play Gym made from a tree branch can fit in your house.
how do you thank an audience for watching your play?
staple remover
how do you connect a cordless xbox controller to your controller wirelessly?
How do you catch and release fish?
floor
To protect your eyes when cutting steel, you can
How do you recycle air bags in shipping containers?
how do you let an egg yolk run?
Make small rope.
To transfer a paper template to a piece of leather, you can
To keep oil from splattering in a pan.
To seal the nail art so it lasts longer.
how do you smooth your lipstick?
how do you use mouthwash?
how do you play a different movie on netflix?
binder clip
To increase the durability of cloth hammock made for small animals.
To remove the original varnish from a piece of wood,
How to use a fire extinguisher.
To improve the shape of an unfit butt,
Dunk oreos into milk without messy fingers.
How do you beat a fire type in Pokemon?
how to remove weeds in patio cracks
How to share a video on Youtube
how do you react to a message on fb?
To make a concrete sphere.
To easily clean a keyboard without keyboard cleaning spray.
Make a table hammock.
How to heat up left over turkey?
To remove the skins from boiled potatoes, you can
what is a polygon
To make your own buttermilk if you don't have any on hand.
To make it easier to knead dough
how to make a kale plum salad
How to stay on track and keep organized
how to make waterproof matches
How to ensure a counter is flat without a spirit level?
Trick kids into eating fruit.
how to prep wood chips for grilling
To easily find small objects in the carpet,
How to transplant bonsai plant from training container to a ceramic display container
Address the envelope
How to secure rose petals to bra.
How can I tenderize venison steaks?
To clean the duck fat pieces for rendering,
razor blade
How to Make a Sweet Vanilla Souffle
How to fry a filet of fish
wrapping paper
how do you pluck a hair?
Remove mirror steam.
spade
How to make a hem on a dress.
how to drain a coconut
How to draw a hopscotch game.
How to build the base of your DIY swamp cooler?
What can I use in case of emergency if I don't have a candle?
foot
What is the best way to clean a ceiling fan?
How to make ice cubes
Make oreo ice cream sandwich.
tablecloth
To scoop a ball of dough out of boiling oil, you can
how to mix grout
How can I learn to swim?
How to fill a container with water from a sink that's larger than the sink
What are the steps to clean old metal fixtures?
Making pumpkin pie.
How can I make a random meal
what to use for an inexpensive fire starter
A veterinarian 
To flush the dirt in a garbage disposal
To get the smell of garlic off of your hands.
To find a Lion's Mane mushroom, you can
How to give bath-bombs their shape.
How can you make yourself relax and fall asleep?
Lightly brown chopped onion.
Prevent frozen car door.
To use a game cube memory card.
To help sharpen garbage disposal's blades,
Where do I take a shower
to Keep Car Cup Holders Clean
To line a spring form cake pan with parchment paper.
To do a deep clean on your carpet
How can I create marbles with a shattered glass effect?
How can you tell if your own breath smells bad?
How to secure pvc pipe onto leaf blower.
axe
To prepare a professional Christmas card without spending a lot,
Make a plunger holder..
To regrow a stalk of green onion,
Make organic fire starter.
how to keep cut herbs fresh
Polish delicate surfaces.
How can I soothe serious burns?
To use a pushpin.
microwaves
To tighten nuts on a homemade wooden shoe rack
To find new, local bands that you may like,
To create a protective metal shield for cheap, you can
To get boards to an even thickness, you can
vise grip
cash
how do you open a bottled soda?
To improve the texture of dough that is too dry,
What is the best size for a napkin holder?
How can I use a tennis ball on the legs of my furniture to protect the floor?
How can you prevent a jostled soda can from exploding?
How do you untwist your thread.
Make tea.
earring back
How to create a simple sheath for a knife?
which cutting boards are aweful
To mix cheese with other ingredients, you can
To add padding to the Bionic El Wire Mask so it is comfortable to wear.
shoe sole
How to heat up thin metal quickly?
To design a doodle pillow case for a child.
How can I organize my clothes during a trip?
Making red cake batter
picture
Making the board
How to make Chocolate Heath Bar Ice cream bars at home without an Ice cream freezer.
To launch matlab application for design purposes.
What is the best way to cook and shuck corn on the cob?
What prep work is required for cauliflower steaks?
a toy
when should I season my food?
To dilute the color of paint, you can
Increase grip of tool handles.
how to make a silky sauce
How do I cook muffins into a muffin shape?
To make a garden trellis,
To create a flower shape for a necklace using seed beads.
where to poop?
How do you fix a hole in the ceiling?
To aid in the slicing the cranberry cookie dough roll,
What is the best hammer for a demolition site
To exercise your jaw muscles regularly,
How do you put gas in your car
white noise
Should I keep the water or drain it for my romen?
How do I start lacing up this pattern?
How to star an email on gmail
How to Make Creamy Mac and Cheese
To mix peanut butter, flour, eggs, and sugar to make cookie dough, you can
clothing
what to substitute sour cream with
can I make praline bars at home?
To cut the sides of a piece of a wood at a specific angle, you can
find a good sauce for the veggies
To crush a clove of garlic, you can
what to use to polish a car
Mount wall shelves.
How to pull a chain onto a bicycle?
To apply a disk of sandpaper to the disc of an HDD
To thicken a sauce while cooking it, you can
Build a book shelf out of old lumber.
What to do to stay hydrated?
To melt sugar in a sauce pan,
How do you honk the horn in a Ford Focus?
To enhance the flavor of rice when you begin frying it.
To maintain good dental hygiene,
What can I plant in my garden to repel pests?
To check that a deep fried turkey has been thoroughly cooked,
how to make classic hot cocoa
What is used to make a project bluetooth compatible?
cup
How to make pasta sauce.
To repair a flip flop band.
how to clean coffee maker
how to make red wine risotto
How can I spray water in hard to reach spots?
To substitute one egg if you are out of it in a cake,
How to press all the moisture out of yogurt?
how do you wear a graduation cap?
How do you condense a toilet to be taken out for trash?
What gives the Pistachio Truffle a brown color?
To charge your phone when the charger isn't working.
How to Adopt a Cat
ladder
Dry small areas of paint faster.
A bodybuilder
Deodorize kitchen trash bin.
To prevent a tape roll from ticking to itself,
To carve letters precisely into the wooden board.
To cool off an item faster when using ice,
how do you use airdrop on an iphone?
what do you need to make your own vibrant, organic, edible dyes?
How to make urine solution to tan salmon leather.
Make branches for chocolate tree
To run the Windows experience index in Windows 10.
pin
Use the freezer for keeping milk
Make a heartfelt Mothers Day card for mom.
screwdriver
Get a dog to release a bite.
To color homemade toothpaste.
How do you make a chair more comfortable?
how do you stop phone calls or messages on a phone?
What can I organize my small items in my pantry in?
Remove dust from window curtains.
How to cook bacon in a pan.
rags
Use emergency stain remover.
Restore plastic solar cells so they can fully recharge
Make moisturizer from coconut oil
How to trim dogs toenails.
sing on key
Keep your salt from getting lumpy inside the shaker.
to open a Master combination lock without keys.
hammer and nail
How to Perform Stand Up Comedy
To attach plastic sections, you can
How to make mop water.
To hide the raw stitched edge of the loop of the doogie bow tie
To prune your tomato plants,
Cut the front and back base panels.
To make sure that the doors of your car are locked.
Make cloth wall art.
Make dusting windows faster.
What supplies are needed to make a Grim Reaper scythe?
How to prevent irritation after shaving?
how do you read a book?
How to make your shoes stop smelling bad.
How can you make individual cupcakes that are easy to handle?
how do you log out of your facebook?
To make the folds easier in an Origami Magic Ball Lamp.
how to make unrolled cannoli
grill
rocks
skateboard
How to make a chicken pot pie look elegant?
To make it easier to remove bolts from a bike, you can
bricks
how do you equalize two things?
screws
How do you easily use icing to decorate a cake?
How to turn on location services in android
how do you stop a shoe from stinking up?
vise
Reuse garden pots.
To change a folder name on a Microsoft computer
How to grill asparagus.
To reuse old garbage to help fertilize your garden,
How to prepare parchment paper for baking.
tub
To make quitting cigarettes easier,
How to make Back Pack Quick Release Pins with a lathe
How do you screw in a light bulb?
What can I use to make a cheap fake brick wall in my house?
what to put in jars for pb and j overnight oats?
crock pot
Make errie looking fake cuts on arms and face to create a scary costume look.
How can you increase the potency and duration of your perfume.
Trap flying bugs.
How to ensure that a key stays in good working order?
to assess if your refrigerator door seal needs to be replaced
how do you jump start a car?
how do you solve math equations easily?
How can you find cheap E Bay type auctions and auction items?
How to make your fresh cut flowers last longer.
Make a reusable holiday wreath.
How do you choose a Yucca plant to harvest?
What service to turn dough on when making biscuits?
clean dirt and debris out from underneath fingernails.
how to cut metal roof panels?
Avoid spider bites when riding motorcycle.
How do I make a no bake birthday cake?
What is the best time of day to go fishing?
To remove pen markings from a sheet of paper,
To prevent food storage product from expiring prior to use,
How should you hold your hands on the keyboard when playing piano so as to prevent injury and strain?
What should you do to keep paint from drying on a hair brush in between coats.
What is the best way to prepare a steak for grilling?
How do you hydrate?
How many hamburger patties will one pound of ground beef make?
What supplies are needed to make homemade Mod Podge?
projector
to drop something?
To begin cooking chicken, it is important to
how do you find the little dipper
To add a surprising twist to the stuffing in a duck, you can
Unwrinkle clothing
How do you dust a desktop computer?
Bake potatoes without needing to flip.
chopper
stone
The sidewalk
How to Make Guava Barbecue Sauce
To mix the blueberry smoothie thoroughly
Why shouldn't I get a tan this summer?
DIY Knife holder
How to change a car battery.
To make seams in dough stick together, you can
how do you steal something?
cook eggs sunny side up
kitchen towel
To join two lengths of PVC pipe together, you can
To make flour more suitable for baking, you can
How to cut perfect fit crown molding?
How to Take Better Notes
ruler
Create package cushions.
How can I cool down drinks faster?
Restore dried out play dough
how do you pop your back?
how do you put a half ponytail in your hair?
How can you tell if someone is lying to you?
mask for dry hair
forks
how do you run out of time on something?
How many days are in the week
What powers a water rocket?
how do you cram an object?
How to make granola
How to remove the fog from a mirror?
To pour water into the measuring spoon,
oven mitts
How do you determine whether a capacitor is blowout?
Prevent foggy eyeglasses.
handkerchief
To prevent losing your drink and seat when away from the bar,
how do you slick hair back?
Store mason jar lids.
How to Keep Your Underarms Fresh and Clean
razor
How to chill pudding after heating.
To clean a dusty  carpet.
What is the best material to be used for a hammock?
How to cut squares out of wood board.
To get the best deals at the grocery store,
How do you fertilize the soil of a cranberry plant during its first year of growth?
To hem the edges of a cut sock so that they do not fray, you can
To repair a rip in a pair of jeans,
compactor
How to bake a cake.
To make cookies with a box of cake mix.
How to insure you don't lose bolts when changing a car tire?
To cook rice, you can
Add tomato paste to pot without a mess.
How do release a bee you have trapped?
how do you cut off a sentence you're writing?
blade
What can I "roll" if I don't have dice?
industrial saw
To a bury a pumpkin seed, ready for growing.
Remove olive pit
To trace a circle onto a piece of paper, you can
To clean a microwave oven.
How do you play Castle Solitaire?
Keep clothes drawer smelling fresh.
How do you fry the potato slices so they are crispy and kept separate?
How to smooth down antique furniture.
Prevent stolen boxes when living in unsecured location.
how do you cut suddenly in a sport?
how do you light a match?
how do you stop the hiccups?
How do I get water ready to make some coffee in a French Press?
How ot make a paper football.
To lead children in a game of musical chairs,
how far in advanced to get the salad ready for dinner
oven
To help the toddler make a mermaid tail!
how do you close your eyes?
How to cut the pieces for your DIY saw attachment?
How to Become a Genetic Counselor
How can I compartmentalize a large tool case?
how ot find the area of a triangle
how do you check the charge percentage of an iphone while your charging it?
Make a metal wine rack.
tack
how do you backspace on a keyboard?
To make rock candy
How to introduce a fish to its aquarium
To sharpen a lawn mower blade to make a spearhead for hunting.
To put many different songs on a blank CD,
To get rid of a pimple.
how to make your paint tray last longer
To prevent the lava cake batter from overfilling the ramekin
Prevent vampire power waste.
how do you open a car door?
How to weigh a bee hive?
how do you fill a hole outside?
how do you kill someone?
how do you concentrate on something?
Can’t get used to the hard earth under your tent?
how to create your own spice containers for camping
Keep salt from clumping inside a shaker.
Make a plastic grocery bag dispenser.
how ot bake porkchops
shaving razor
How to take macro lens photos with your phone?
To set and place mouse trap successfully,
To seal leather to a keyring, you can
To perfectly etch a design onto wood, you can
To mush the avocado for guacamole.
quickly peel tomatoes
how do you keep all your data in a cloud?
To make trap mechanism out of wood so it will be triggered but will stay together until then.
camera
How to get the baby to sleep when the yard work is going on.
How do you separate Oreos?
Cancel a text message.
What sort of tool should i use to cut the wood smooth for the ring?
How to prepare bag for piping flowers onto cake.
Create a ghost for your front yard for Halloween.
Picture Frames
To add stuffing to Chinese Dumpling wrappers
How to plug headphones into a smartphone.
whistle
how to make garlic-cauliflower and pasta
To make sure the nails and plugs are the same height for a coin bank.
To keep garden soil from growing weeds.
how to appy a banana and oatmeal facial peel
binder clip
How to remove cork without a cork screw from a wine bottle?
How to submerge rusted tool in vinegar.
How to attach a piece of fabric to the top of a desk.
How do I filter the ocean water?
To attach a paper pattern to an MDF board, you can
To protect the area you are cutting the watermelon in
how do you drench something in water?
Keep the attic cool.
How can you control the highly varying temperatures when smoking food using a kettle BBQ?
To layer pancake and the brownie batter for the pancake brownie
The sauna
how do you trap something?
What is commonly seen as the best star wars movie?
how do you cash a check on a mobile bank app?
How can I acquire more crochet material without buying it at a specialty store?
How to prepare wood before repainting.
Inflate a balloon.
nails
How do you decide on the correct size for a Photography Backdrop?
What supplies are needed to make a braided rug?
How can I prevent a cream puff from collapsing while baking?
how do you promote something on facbook?
clamp
To protect a note from any damage,
How would I find out the angle to set on solar panels that I intended to mount on a shed?
How do I sweeten my coffee?
milk jug
For attaching bathroom tiles onto a shower after they fall off,
Prevent shoes from getting other items in luggage dirty.
To keep the sun off of your face,
how do you wear an engagement ring?
To transfer a pencil sketch to a digital one.
How do you coat cake pop in chocolate?
What is the result of adding two numbers
finger
how do you learn how to fight?
How to wash clothes
Make garden labels.
how to make italian deli bean salad
Where can I buy beef jerky
What is the best way to find something shiny you have dropped?
flowers
Sort laundry.
Avoid getting stung by a bee swarm.
fingers
How can I prepare my shoes before painting them?
How to make a simple wooden box?
What type of wax can be used for making homemade candles?
How can I make a rounded edge on a block of wood?
To make a peach cobbler,
How to change the color of a shirt that you don't like.
To remove screws from the base of a monitor, you can
How long should I cook butter cookies?
Installing handles on a drawer.
What kind of boxes are good for making shelves?
To keep pacifiers clean inside of a purse,
What materials are needed to align a drill press table?
sing better
How do I sharpen a pencil without a pencil sharpener?
Remove pen marks from bedroom walls.
how long should you boil eggs to make perfect hard boiled eggs?
To hold a small piece of wire while you screw one end into a small tile, you can
For a cool summer treep
How to add a rustic look to wooden furniture?
Making the cut out for the jar
To get rid of air bubbles in uncooked cookies with liquid batter.
How do I get the trash can to close when full?
how to disinfect granite counter top
What type of paper should be used to make the bookmarks?
How do I cut my grass?
how do you get rid of a pimple?
How to heat the pot while making bread in a pot?
How can I cook garlic until it is lightly browned?
How can I have a chance to reconsider messages I have just replied to via e mail?
How to make your lava for your DIY lava lamp?
Empty a garbage can.
how to clean your car
How do you hang a sign?
What types of oil should be used when making a hand salve?
Borrow books from the library to read at home.
how to add intense flavors to broths
To make an antenna if your television antenna is broken,
To remove screws from an LED casing, you can
how do you finance someone?
how do you optomize something?
Apply a splint to a broken finger.
How long should you bake a peperoni pizza for?
Start a nice bubble bath.
How to file your nails properly
To store soda cans for recycling.
What do I do with the bananas for the ice cream?
how to fix floor scuffs
teachers
Make mess free paint.
To hold wood pieces together while they dry, you can
plastic
To make your homemade rocket stable and likely to fly straight.
How can I sleep more soundly at night?
To make Toffee Sauce with bananas.
To stop the pasta from cooking
How to prevent glasses from getting lost?
How to melt chocolate to make a Star Wars Death Star shape
Homemade weed killer
How do you round the edges of the table?
mold
To ferment pineapple quickly for beer.
To protect a home made house from rain,
tissues
How can I save money using my Amazon Prime account?
Make own deodorant.
How can I make Pizza dough SUPER quick and easy?
How to smooth a crumpled or damaged book page?
credit card
To prevent sausages from exploding while being cooked, you can
Clean glass shower doors.
What should I do with old school supplies I have?
How to clean a knife
To cut a small piece of breadboard to use in a box, you can
receipt
Make the frame
To secure your seatbelt,
How do I clean the aluminum after cutting when making industrial picture frames?
how do you turn a pound into ounces?
how do you put a kid on time out?
Grow a small plant indoors.
Create a crisp crease in a fabric square folded in half.
when I am driving an older car with no cupholders where can I place my beverage?
Cool down body temperature quickly.
how to kick brussels sprouts up a notch
To keep cookies from sticking to the cookie sheet.
Adhere LED lights to helmet.
Keep your TP (toilet paper) dry and safe while camping
sofa
How do I prepare the phyllo dough before making baklava?
how to eat food?
How do you mop the floor?
how do you jump start a car?
To fuse the chocolate dinosaur bones to the dinosaur bone cake
How can you add more storage space in a laptop?
Prevent irritation from earrings.
How to make the flashlight turn on.
how do you take a bath?
What is the best area to print of a t-shirt?
How do you layers of fabric together
What ingredients are needed for making a lava lamp?
To fold paper into fourths.
Baking a salmon.
strainer
how do you use a bouncy house?
To upgrade your home on the cheap
How can I create my own potting soil mix?
Keep control of your garden hose.
Create painting drop cloth that doesn't tear easily.
small container
To increase the velocity of the shot from an air gun.
How to make hot chocolate.
how do you hold a phone correctly?.
how do you dash salt?
To remove gum from your hair.
cotton ball
how do you help a baby jump?
To buff beeswax painting with a cloth,
To turn chopped tomatoes into a fine paste, you can
Bake the cookies in the oven.
How to quickly remove the pit from an avocado?
coffee filter
How to find a bad wire in a car.
How to Separate Egg Whites and Yolks
To keep all the butter cookies the same size
rod
To spit out chewing tobacco when their isn;t a trash can nearby.
To pop your ears easily while changing altitude,
how to use vinegar to remove stickiness
Whats the fastest way to get somewhere
how do you turn down the volume on a car radio?
To protect expensive items from theives while at the beach,
To catch dust when drilling a hole in the wall.
Hoe to roll soft tacos
To reuse a fish tank without it smelling bad, you can
Make boiled eggs easier to peel
Make a succulent planter for free.
To get better rest at night,
How to do an Awesome Color Experiment using a mixture to break down a colored marker.
how to make cocoa almonds
How to ensure the drafting papers for a room layout are clean and orderly?
To test baking soda to make sure it's still good.
How to tell when a pancake is done cooking.
how do you use a roku?
To let the sourdough mixture work through the ingredients, what should you do?
hair
To help keep your rooms bright,
Keep soil healthy in garden.
How do you put a worm on a hook?
cart
To carve a bone into a naalbinding needle shape.
how do you power off a computer?
Tools needed to make a wooden wedding ring.
how can I plant a broken piece of cactus?
How to make pancakes.
How do you make a heavy metal table movable yet to be stable at one place if needed?
microwave
How do you address an envelope?
One seeks to have a scary Halloween decoration.
Remove painful band-aids.
How can you clear a room full of Cigarette smoke?
how to easily mop your floor
oven
Avoid mirror cleaning streaks.
To cut copper cable, you can
Increase strength of brittle hair.
how to add a light garlic flavor to dishes?
To add lemon juice to a drink, you can
How to best cut a mango?
Make lemon water.
How do you select ripe strawberries to eat?
What can I do to clear ice off my steps?
What can I use to eat ice cream
To cut discs out of plywood to make knobs, you can
bobby pin
How do you cut out a butterfly from a note card?
Escape from a black bear.
How do you rescue a honeybee stuck in a pool?
How to remove dirt under your nails.
how to store herbs
How do I comment on a post
how do you win at uno?
To draw a perfect circle on a piece of paper.
make waterfall
how do you fill out a captcha on mturk?
Make apple fruit donuts
box
How to sharpen a blunt scissor?
Escape from quicksand.
How do you remove scratch from car door?
To make music sound more folk-like when performing live,
Waterproof sticker labels.
How do you make fake snow?
Peeling a Mango by Hand
How do you choose a container in which to grow a cranberry seedling?
Make a wooden shoe rack.
Make car air freshener.
How do I decorate Easter eggs?
mallet
How to get Unemployment Benefits
make curtain
When using olive oil and herbs, when should you mix in the herbs?
How do I clean a car windshield?
To round corners of a wooden cube,
how do you spread things out?
lounge
Where does a chef work
How to quiet a squeaky door hinge.
To bend strips of metal that are too strong to bend by hand, you can
To eat yogurt without a spoon,
To make your jeans more accessible when hanging them in your closet.
To make a Play Dome out of Cardboard
how to clean white shoes
To combine flour, sugar and water, you can
How do I keep birds from hanging out on my property?
To get the crumbs out of the bottom of the cereal bag.
How do you get rid of mice?
Deter ants with fresh scent.
Refresh and renew old windshield wipers.
Prevent musty smell on rarely used clothes.
shoe
rake
How can you find out if a large woman is pregnant or just big?
To prepare mustard seeds for grinding into mustard.
How do I determine my band size for the perfect sized bra?
To roll up a newspaper
Can I make my own curry seasoning?
To make a wooden project perfect after you've completed construction, you can
How to wear a hat?
How do I add egg to the hot water to poach it?
Remove an annoying song from your head.
how to be a vegetarian?
To puree bananas together, you can
What should you use to break drywall?
Add shine to cooper cooking tools.
Sleep on a bus without worrying about stolen bags.
How to Prepare for a Sports Tournament
To open a jar with a difficult lid without duct tape.
how to make pb&j cheesecake bites
Where do I find a lion
To peel the skins off of peaches,
To prepare your body for a big running race in the morning,
How do I fold a plastic shopping bag to make it into fabric?
How to clean built-up tarnish on a brass jewelry?
The main vegetable you must buy for guacomole is
fill in brows
How to pass someone scissors.
How do you use a tin can to juice baneberries?
Remove pencil writing without eraser.
In order to turn on a lamp using a danging cord,
How to make fried chocolate pies at home.
How to anchor bonsai tree.
How do you put a cleaning tab in the dishwasher?
to   determine which eggs have a developing baby chick inside and which eggs do not
What are three ways to burn 100 calories in less than one hour?
rubber stamp
How to separate egg yolks from egg whites?
ball
How to make Reeses Cup Vanilla Ice cream at home.
whiteboard
How to cream shortening and sugar.
To patch holes in pastry dough.
How can I cook peaches on the grill?
What material is good to make a wall pocket from?
To make Churro dough
To prevent your hair from getting oily and gross,
Make a bird feeder.
Use the resin to affix the image to the bottle cap.
How to clean a leather couch.
What equipment do I need to make strawberry napoleons?
Swallow pills easier.
How to collect rain fall?
how to make ricotta-broccoli pasta
Help screws go into wood easily without breaking the head off or stripping the screw.
how to change a lightbulb
To make peppermint bark
night stand
To attach LEDs to a brass wire,
to attach the pool noodle to the sifting bin
Unclog toilet without plunger.
Disinfect chopping board.
To prepare strawberries to be chopped, you can
Follow a paleo diet
mouth
How do you load a staple gun?
Clean inside air conditioning vent.
how do you circle something?
How to make the boards for your stool?
To increase the size of your bicep muscles,
How to Test Extending Grabber
How do you keep fish moist while grilling?
How to soak up excess oil from meat and vegetables when they're done cooking.
One seeks to cook their Mexican Pizza.
To take care of icy steps without salt.
Heal chapped lips naturally.
To create a detox bath for relaxation,
How to cut a piece of ply board for bicycle cargo trailer
Organize your closet.
To get natural curls in your hair,
how do you get gas out of your body?
How to color the soap.
how to make corn-bean salsa
Recycle old toilet paper rolls
how do you walk sideways?
To give away baby pets after a pet gives birth,
how to make curry powder
how to remove a label from plastic
Adhere two boards to themselves so they will not come apart.
How do you fill a ladle with soup?
How to saturate dryer lint.
oven
How to properly dry a knife after washing it?
How can I dice garlic without stinky hands after?
How do you make a picture look aged and weathered?
How do you distribute candy on Halloween?
To cut a piece of pallet wood
In order to keep a room from getting too dusty,
Removing paint from soda cans
How do you season chicken?
what to use to clean a leather dash?
how to make peanut butter cookie toast
What is a good way to rush somewhere in a hurry?
Can you make house door numbers from cardboard?
How often should I water my plants in the outdoor garden?
To keep the outside of a paint can clean.
To add a zipper onto a crocheted bag
How to make a wrench grip tight again?
Best way to avoid a barbed wire
To prevent contamination of the frosting while dying it
stapler
how do you accurately track footsteps?
To treat rickets,
How do I pour a glass of water?
To create orange paint,
How do you change water color?
What temperature needs to be set for the muffins?
How to Kill Green Hair Algae in a Freshwater Aquarium
Prevent diluted coke soda.
Warm bed and save energy.
moss
Cleaning up dye on sticks
Separate small hardware parts during assembly.
One wishes to make their own play dough.
To eat a snack that will reduce headache pains,
To keep ticks away from you when hiking,
How to make DIY Cardboard Stamps
To remove stuck on food from a dish,
Prevent mildew inside bath toys.
seal the bottom of the tshirt bag
How do I carve the face of a pumpkin?
To make french toast, you can
how to make curried couscous salad
Prevent soft crust when reheating leftover pizza.
Prevent crusty cheese on food.
Make stamped tool markings easier to read.
Keep fleas out of the house
To make eggs cooked in microwave fluffy.
how to make penne with sun dried tomatoes
How to shape melted aluminium?
To minimise the chance of dripping oil onto the open flame
how do you numerate something?
Make a headboard for a Queen sized bed.
how do you murder someone?
how to make cajun pork tacos
To place a turkey deep fryer in a safe location for frying,
How to make a page-holder for a book without using any addition material?
How can I help a cough at home?
make a fun spiked fondue
my cake has a dome top, how do I flatten it?
How to cool a computer down quickly?
How can I keep my keys organized?
One seeks to stock their travel kit.
To make pizza crispier without affecting the texture of the pizza,
Store extra sponges.
how do you reject a date with someone?
To trace hearts on parchment paper to pipe chocolate hearts.
To cut a section out of a piece of fabric, you can
how to make an easy dressing for fruit salad
How to slice bread
how can I deter mmice
To cut small notches into wood to make a fret board, you can
To make a prototype for a project
How can you tell someone is lying?
sticks
To clear out a clogged toilet,
cook burgers in the air fryer
Make a temporary bundt pan.
How to sync your iPhone with Ford Sync?
To make wood joints wavy dovetails.
How to wax the car.
How to clean a child's school backpack?
How to Become a Doctor
how do you print your name?
Did you update your software and hate it?  How can you go back to the old version?
How do you get rid of a Permanent marker mark on your skin?
clean kale
camera
hair pick
rock grinder
How to grind coffee beans
coffee flavored cookies
To prevent a hangover,
How to sleep better at night
Cutting wire for extension cord.
To strip wire,
What is a good type of paint for toddlers to use?
how to slice small fruit
What are some steps to cleaning my closet?
how to propagate an aloe plant
How to make a grilled cheese sandwich.
To paint a wall,
crowbar
To smooth out a large log before turning it into a lamp.
To make a pokémon dectective pikachu cake,
tape
How can you get paid to go to the gym?
To plan a girl scout meeting activity,
To keep your shoes from getting wet in the drizzle.
How do you make a hand puppet?
How do measure your pant size?
how do you use the mats at a gym?
To keep track of who to thank for gifts after a party,
To make your central heat and air unit work properly,
how do you use a throw pillow?
How to make Vanilla Short Bread Trefoil Girl scout cookie Ice cream at home without an Ice cream Freezer
How do I make sure that the plank is perpendicular to the beam ?
To cut the seams out of a piece of clothing, you can
Dish sponge
To crush garlic cloves, you can
how do you center yourself?
How do I locate the Indus constellation
What type of paint should I use to paint my valve cover?
To add hair to a clay sculpture, you can
Thaw a frozen car lock.
To eat a pineapple,
Easy guacamole
axe
Avoid getting electrocuted during a storm.
What's the best way to get a fair deal from a taxi driver?
How to clean a shaker bottle so it does not build up an odor?
How can I clean my violin?
skillet
To store the Grandpa fudge cookies
How to long to cook your apple butter pumpkin pie?
empty make up kit
To prevent oils from setting at the top of organic peanut butter,
To make a S'moreo when camping outdoors,
How can I make a sprinkling watering container/can at home?
Gun Safe
How to Figure out Area of A Parallelogram by Drawing a Grid
To make a reminder on your iphone.
To give a dog a hygiene cut,
how to make red beans and rice
How do I help bread dough to rise?
How to Take Care of a Dog
How to display a birdhouse.
To finish a full marathon,
One seeks to make their records malleable.
To deodorize your child's mattress,
How to ice a cupcake with a rustic look?
To remove the protective coating on a plastic headlight, you can
Store fluorescent light tubes.
How to keep rare pokemon cards protected.
keep the kitchen clean while cooking
Prevent pie crust from burning.
How can you make yarn from T-shirts?
How to make Vanilla Lady fingers chocolate Ice cream at home.
What can you use as a pickle weight when constructing a fermentation jar for pickling?
To scoop frozen ice cream quickly from it's container,
video
How to get water off my phone?
rolling pin
How to care for stitches.
How do I clean out dust from computer vents?
What type of wood is easiest to etch?
What can you do with leaves?
How to remove ketchup stains from clothing?
How can I cool drinks faster in the refrigerator?
How to put on nylon stockings?
Where can I see dolphins
how do you calculate wavespeed
To efficiently clean up vomit.
To prevent juices from running out of your trash bag,
Two save money when ordering delivery pizza,
How to dismiss a notification on an android phone
Be a savvy consumer.
Make a zone list for family chores.
How can you bind your own book?
Teach a dog to lie down.
To find the center of a cord, you can
How do you care for Tulips after they bloom?
ice cream scoop
how do you clean lettuce?
How do I dry my dishes
To remove wooden boards from a wooden pallet.
video tape
coin
cement
Focus on a problem.
To trim the edges of a wooden board, you can
To make children clean their room quickly,
roast asparagus
To tell a real diamond from a fake.
How can I roll a joint if I don't have any rolling papers?
How can I prevent ceramic bowls from being scratched up or damaged?
Make eating surface without plates.
To connect a filament bulb in the bulb holder
how do you use the upper arrow symbol on the laptop keyboard?
To warm up your house without costing too much for electricity,
How can I protect surfaces while doing painting projects?
One is seeking a holiday to give chocolate.
How do I smooth the edges of the board ?
To clean the bones of a specimen.
how do I make homemade guac?
Keep ants out of the your house
How do I prepare the ramekins when making vanilla souffles?
oven
How can I keep hair color from staining skin?
lime powder
How do you choose the correct paint color to mark your queen bee?
How do I get rid of weeds in my garden?
how do you squash something?
How do you block a sword swing?
watch a good show
Store small pills.
The first thing you need to do after getting the ingredients for the cookies
What temperature should I cook the milk when making kheer?
how to cook brown rice faster
To paint large pieces of wood for display case that covers length of a hallway.
Remove a bloodstain from a piece of fabric.
Avoid coffee effects when trying to sleep.
how do you use a couch cushion
To make melted cheese creamier,
To increase the volume on a Toshiba satellite P745 model
how do you sit at a table?
How to make a fun pendant for a necklace?
Clean paint brushes.
make a bird house.
Prevent silverfish in bathroom.
place books into gift basket
to cut on a television
how ot jump a car to start
How do you get dust off of a surface?
Start a fire using a magnifying glass.
How can I re-purpose an old circuit board?
To mix the ingredients for chocolate chip cookie in a mug
How do I stabilize the cartons before pouring in the soap?
To dry okra after washing it, you can
How do I frost chocolate peppermint brownies?
Make outdoor pillow.
How to potty train a puppy.
How to make a painting physically durable?
how to program a new smart code on Weiser door lock code?
How to Throw a Party
How to mix chocolate extract.
to save money on ice and keep your food cold for longer
How do you properly dispose of latex paint?
how do you make something personal?
To learn to dance.
mouth
To make a simple base for a pinata,
To clean old CDs that are scratched and dirty so that they continue to work,
hands
To bake mashed potato fingers in the oven.
How to open a box of pasta
tissue
how to check meat for doneness
how do you help a baby walk?
to seal a box?
How to cut round biscuit dough into a donut shape.
make bubble
To prevent colon cancer,
How to remove oil spills from carpet.
What ingredients do I need to make homemade Hummus?
What kind of soil needs to be aerated most often?
To make an award winning chili for a chili cook off,
when travelling, keep your dirty and clean clothes separate by
how to make farro caprese
How to make a chair cushion more comfortable?
How can I keep picture frames from scratching the wall?
Fix loud bed frame.
hair pick
How do you cite a college website?
syrup
how do you know if you need gas in your car?
How to transfer templates onto planks of wood.
To get the job.
What to do when you move to your new place
how do you exit out the browser on a macbook pro.?
How to grow your own vegetables?
Flushing the bottom of the stringer with ground.
how to roast a chicken
how do you turn on a water hose?
suspenders
Use alternate to butter when making cookies.
How do you proof dough for baking bread?
To aid in the donuts sticking together for the donut cake
How to recognize if a food is warm or cold?
To soften sweet potatoes, you can
In case of a fire during the frying the turkey
how to make a chicken cobb salad
Where to keep the feeding bowl of your dog?
How can you use banana peels on your teeth?
To hang the painted, vintage key to make a necklace.
counter
How to carve wood into a shape?
To charge your cell phone battery,
how do you erase writing on a dry erase board?
To keep pizza crust from getting chewy in the microwave.
What ingredients are needed for a basic bowl of vegetarian ramen?
To remove an acorn nut from an acorn
gun
how do you tweak something?
To prevent accidentally gluing a costume to a mannequin while trying the costume on the mannequin, you can
Hit a volleyball over a net.
Can your own dried beans.
How do you identify when to take a stem cutting from a camellia plant?
To keep liquid from spilling out of a trash bag.
how do you remove a splinter from skin?
To add wood dust extraction to a router base.
make folds resembling vein
how to set up a kitchen workspace
To grow a line of trees.
How to Make Doors for Easy Workshop Cabinets
To get to the brakes on a car for replacement.
Make fabric gift wrap.
How to glue the wall pieces of a birdhouse.
Chalk
how to make an egg wash
How to add cushion to a cattle room?
keep zoodles from being soggy
To clean a laundry basket.
how do you look for apps to download on a macbook pro?
Eat sweet potatos
How do you prevent your crust from getting soggy when making a fresh Peach/Raspberry pie?
How can you measure something to see if it is about 6 inches long without a ruler?
leather sheath
how to substitute simple syrup
hammer
freezer
How to make Italian Lemon Ice at home.
To prepare reclaimed wood to be painted, you can
To help relieve problems with bugs at night.
how to brighten curtain color
how do you eat arroz con leche?
What can I use around the house to treat a pimple?
how to make a curried tuna salad
when calling customer support and getting an automated system
How do I screw the 5" decking screw into the beam ?
what to do with a lot of cheese before it goes bad?
To help increase alertness when working,
To recycle the logo from an old punk band t-shirt.
To give yourself sufficient time at airport security,
how do you cover something?
crowbar
How do I seed cucumbers?
how do you go live on facebook?
How To Make Creamy Mac N Cheese
marker
If you are making batter and it is too firm, you can
To make it so that dough doesn't stick to a counter while you roll it out
How do you attach two boards for a door frame?
how do you sponser someone?
how to make apple moons
To laminate the surface of a wood project, you can
How to clean a bicycle helmet?
How to know if a girl enjoys your attention?
Leafy Stepping-Stones
How can I reduce stress and reduce anxiety with music?
To make sure you have plenty of financial security while travelling,
how do you pop the hood of a car?
To prepare a trailer for camping,
To make pumpkin stems out of chocolate to put on pumpkin cupcakes.
To clean a mirror without producing streaks, and without newspaper, paper towels or cloths on hand,
pot
homemade floor cleaner
How do I unscrew the gas cap to my car?
how do you send a reply on facebook messanger
wet floor
To help feel more sleepy when laying in bed,
how do you wear high top shoes?
how to reduce the weight in a large potted plalnt
How do you make a tornado in a bottle?
How to wash your bike off after a muddy ride
To cut a strip of silver, you can
tissue
fist
how to get crispy skin on chicken
how to crush garlic
Remove mildew from bath tiles.
To score a 4 point play in a basketball game,
To give a reason why making pasta in a slow cooker is better
How do I make chocolate chip cookie dough?
hammer
How to change the color of a torch light?
how to cut sticky desserts
How do I mash up the oreo cookies when making oreo ice cream?
Create a bean heating pad.
how do you show the end of a sentence while writing?
How do you decorate a cake without frosting?
What does the kit need to clean up blood?
To make a small plant pot base to put on a desk.
can
How to fix a broken button on a TV remote?
How to ride a bike.
crowbar
How long after I eat do I need to wait until swimming?
how to juice a lime with a pair of tongs
D.I.Y glitter from CDs and DVDs.
How can you get mud off of your shoes?
how do you count?
paint
To save electric in the winter,
How do I set the table?
pincers
How to cut PVC pipe.
How to Make Homemade Instant Oatmeal
How to cut away excess grip from a fresh grip on a skateboard?
For making a paper crown, how should I first fold the paper?
floor
How do I fix a candle wick that is buried in the candle?
how to keep bacon from curling
Check shipping tracking # quickly.
To have less have less injuries while exercising or running,
Remove permanent marker off skin.
How to get someone to stop teasing you
how do you stand a pool up?
How to Care for a Puppy when You Work Full Time
push pin
How do you curl your eyelashes with an eyelash curler?
How can you remember something you are thinking of but can't quite remember?
How to quickly grill a chicken breast?
how do you use a pillowcase?
How to remove a link from a bike chain.
To fix a PC that won't turn on.
cutting board
What do you need to make a Quiddich ring set?
To make old glass bottles into an instrument,
instant pot beef in marinade
How to wet clothes?
To dry wet long hair
how do you turn the shower on?
how do you watch something on tv?
To secure flaps in a cardboard box, you can
how to make light ranch dressing
mechanical pencil
Make a medicine dispenser for kids.
How to make a pincushion.
Secure a wire to a battery terminal.
How to Make Best Easy Banana Bread
wite-out
To create a tracking and warning system for predators around bird feeders.
To remove emulsion from the photo paper stencil for screen printing.
How to cold brew coffee at home?
use cucumber seeds in a cooking recipe
To build a box to store the firewood inside the house.
To remember that you gave an item to a friend,
To keep your cords from getting all tangle up
How to Empty a Trash Bin
how to use spray paint
How can I have ice cold water in my water bottle from home?
how to melt crayons
How to make healthier dressings.
How do you inflate your bike tires?
How can you restore and repair small dents in wood (Like a wood floor)?
How to pause a video on youtube on your browser
To make pretend tentacles for a cake that looks like an octopus, you can
To flour a banneton,
Clean a car's windshield using the windshield wiper at a gas station.
How do you eat a corn dog?
Remove scuff marks from a tile floor.
rock
hand
how to use bleach when handwashing clothes
How do I prepare red bell pepper and spinach for goal cheese white sauce pasta?
Make a pair of earrings from scrabble tiles.
How do dry off after a bath.
How do I dance
Learn how to do a proper stomach crunch.
How do I improve my mood naturally?
To freshen up an old dishwasher,
pin
How can you reduce pizzas slipping around on a car seat?
To clean a clothes iron.
Repot a growing plant.
pillow
How to ensure the rice cake bites stay in shape and form?
what to do with broccoli stalks?
How do you thicken heavy whipping cream?
Clean pine sap from your hands
how to keep pillows clean
how do you take a picture using the iphone camera?
How do you open a metal ring?
To lower the PH of a solution, you can
Clean soap scum from shower door.
What is a fun way to add style to your fringe t-shirt?
how do you use a hammock?
To thread a needle easily.
cut can
If your cat is lost
how to turn bread into breadcrumbs
How to ensure you don't use your guitar pick?
Prevent lost remotes.
What are the best topping to use on a pizza?
One seeks to make a rocket capable of flying for a kid.
What ingredients do I need to make cheesy garlic bread?
To sweep a team in the nba playoffs,
How do I scratch the acrylic glass to make it frosted ?
Attach a large metal nail through the bottom of a wooden disc.
how to make english pudding petits fours
How to soften a hardened paintbrush to paint with?
How can I reinforce thread and make it stronger?
What can I to close my homemade tea bag
What supplies are needed to make paper candle shades?
how to ensure pies bake evenly?
What can you do if you are baking cookies and don't have an egg?
To pack jewelry for traveling,
how to make baked goods shiny and golden brown
How to you prepare yams to be roasted in a skillet?
Gluing leather to the cover inserts
How can I start my day in an organized way?
How do you make Thai iced tea?
How do you prepare the fruit for a white sangria?
How to bring down a fever.
how to measure things without them sticking
How can I straighten bent gutters?
How do I prepare dry ingredients to make macarons?
Why do we tend to use too much sugar in foods?
how do you start an email on the yahoo app?
how do you get picked for jury duty?
To grill hamburger safely and tastily
Prevent snails in garden.
How to smooth the surface of a work piece.
To prevent bacon from sticking to the pan while cooking
how to safely hold a nail
To keep a dish edible for as long as possible, you can
How can you ensure the button you're sewing is in the right place?
How do you identify a queen bee by size?
to prevent your bathroom mirror from fogging up after a hot shower
How can I hide my money, keys and license when I am swimming at the beach?
how do I make a messy hair bun?
Create string yarn dispenser.
How can I wrap homemade candy hearts to give as party favors?
Quickly break in a baseball glove
How can you add graphic designs to a table cloth?
Make mayo substitute.
how to make chocolate almonds
journal
To laminate several strips of wood together, you can
Is apple cider vinegar a good health food?
How can I open a tight key ring without hurting my fingers or nails?
One wishes to light up their bike ride.
How do I make delicious green tea?
To connect a table top to its legs,
To add a shiny finish to wood, you can
To fold a washrag for kitchen use
How to make fried food more healthy?
How to store a delicate dress?
How to prevent a cake from burning
stick
How do I unclog a toilet without a plunger?
nail clipper
How do you flatten rolled watercolor paper?
To steam oysters
How to put grip tape on a bat.
How to create a bar counter from old furniture?
Remove blood stain from T-shirt.
How to attach wooden planks for adirondack chair.
How to measure weight
What should you avoid when you are working with chillies?
How do I prolong the sharpness of a kitchen knife?
How to change a tire on a vehicle.
paperclip
How are the four gas giants similar?
What do you wear to a funeral?
How to reuse a pizza box?
How to peel a banana.
What do I need to do to unlock terminals in Fallout?
How to prevent toffee from sticking to a baking sheet?
what do I put on a salad for a spicy thai?
To secure the plastic soda bottle rodent trap.
How to fill the neckhole of the t-shirt for the hammock.
How to stop a migraine headache
How do you place a thumbtack?
refrigerator
dynamite
how do you get free throws in basketball?
sleeve
How do you open a can of paint?
how to remove rings in candle wax
To apply resin to a journal cover.
Sew a simple plastic bag holder.
How do you identify a ripe persimmon by touch?
To separate broccoli from water, you can
To restore moisture to your face without lotions, etc.
How do you sharpen a wooden knife?
How to make a unique christmas wreath?
how do you provide for someone?
How do I use baking soda to whiten my teeth?
Prevent sweat build up in shoes.
To test if caramel is ready to be done cooking, you can
To easily drive a screw face into a hole.
where do you cut your long-sleeve shirt if you want to make your arm warmer as long as possible from it?
How to fold paper without a ruler?
how do you carry money around?
How to take the heat out of jalapenos.
mallet
To avoid moving the heart shaped cookie dough for the love cookies
To get a better weld on a chopped kick bike,
How to choose and cut a Wooden Dowel for Magnet Trampoline Project
easily open plastic bags
To transfer peanut butter from a food processor to a bowl, you can
How can I make a cat scratching post?
How to make Fireball Cinnamon Ice cream at home.
To create polka dots on painted nails,
Where should I hang a hummingbird feeder?
How do I make Ice
milk
To line the square muffin pan with parchment paper so that paper can line the pan exactly.
Protect eye makeup during shower.
How long should meat sauce simmer on the stove after adding the tomato sauce?
To keep shoes from smelling bad
How to find studs in a wall
shirt
how do you bother someone?
How do you make a magnetic spice "non-rack"?
how do you pluck a hair?
To get a sneeze to come out when it won't.
What kind of meat fat dripping should I use in the fire starter?
How do you shave your hair?
Thaw frosted windows.
To peel an orange with a spoon,
Where can I see a bengal tiger
two spoons
How to Make a Leather Cardholder Wallet
How can you make a deli style B.L.T. or other toasted type sandwich at home?
Amplify laptop speaker.
How to bake your chicken wings?
How to make healthy pancakes easily?
How can you regulate your potted plants moisture better?
how to make waterproof matches
How to remove a car tire
How to cut out circle from paper.
how do I locate the Ophiuchus  constellation
easiest way to chop onions
To have a magnetic clamp stick together with your magnet,
How do you give rolls a nice brown crisp dough?
How do you put a key on a key ring?
basket
two coins
To make your Christmas lights turn on.
How do I clean a leather sofa?
How can I clean copper pots and pans?
To safely get rid of a dog that you can no longer take care of,
How to make Peanut butter Reeses Pieces Fudge at home.
What supplies are needed to make a paper cup lotus lamp?
Check if flotation devices are leak proof before mounting.
How do you clean Bamboo straws?
To protect your teeth.
To remove scuff marks from hardwood floors or tiles.
Make bacon in the oven
How do I cut the garlic when making a beef and bourbon pie?
How can I prune my trees and bushes
How to get rid of smelly feet.
How to print letters for a template.
How can I store bacon grease for use later?
How do you decorate a cardboard box with pretty fabric?
To prepare to reheat old fries,
How to set off your smoke bomb?
To avoid spreading germs while storing meat in the fridge,
To cook ground beef without splatters and spitting
To paint cardboard and make it shine, you can
Take out old cheese from grater.
how do you inflate a tire?
To affix ends of fabric together when you finish a project, you can
Prevent tear in stomach lining.
how do you stand on a balance beam?
How do you repair a broken statue?
To help prevent tarnishing on jewelry,
how do you torment someone?
To make a hamburger press,
How to flatten dough for cookies.
how do you spike a drink?
To prevent a pot of water from boiling over,
How to dye a pebble?
Deter ants from picnic.
how do you eat a carrot with ranch?
What is an easy way to clean up spilled glitter?
how do you crunch on food?
To make your hair soft.
baby wipe
How to make scrambled eggs.
What does the FAST acronym mean to a first aid technician?
How to Train Your Puppy with Simple Commands
how do you use a price scanner at walmart?
How to wear a scarf?
How to cook a hot dog over a campfire
When cleaning up an oil spill on concrete, what is the best procedure?
Can I dehydrate pineapple in the oven?
How can I get my shoes to dry faster if they get wet?
Make hot chocolate.
How do you turn on a skateboard?
slingshot
Remove grease from wooden chopping board.
how do you give a baby a binky?
How to Feed Hamsters
How to clean a heavily soiled pan
a person
To prevent a ball of wax from sticking to your hands, you can
how to make pesto pizzas
blender
To afford a vacation one a year or two,
run for excercise
How to Whistle
make rice
One wishes to cruise without expending much energy.
To brown chicken
Avoid getting germs from store doors.
Do I use all the eyelets?
When working with electrical outlets, it is important to
To melt beeswax in a crockpot,
What can I use as a bird feeder in my backyard?
Grow roses from cutting.
To occupy yourself while waiting for your flight,
how do you plank?
Reduce redness of dry skin.
How can I remove the design from the bottom of a skateboard.
To pick the best steak for grilling,
Remove grease from your frying pans
cardboard
How can I get rid of dry skin on my hands?
To insulate your home and major appliances,
how do you put lip gloss on?
When can I see the moon the best
Make a quesadilla without a stove.
How to make an omelet.
paper towel
stand mixer
How To Make In-N-Out Double Double Cheeseburger Copycat
To have makeup applied to your face nicely without a mirror,
To make bicycling up a steep hill on a ten speed bike easier,
Organize toddler's dolls.
To keep pieces of wood securely together while running them over a router.
How to Attach Hinges for an Easy Collapsible Worktable
To easily carry a sweatshirt if the weather gets warm and you need to take it off,
HOw do I measure brown sugar for a recipe?
Clean ink spot from purse.
Remove skin from fish.
How to sharpen a knife outside?
earring back
How do I split the bread in half for a tuna sub?
How can I keep my rugs from sliding around on my ceramic or smooth floors?
how do you take someone's temperature?
How can I keep toes apart while painting nails?
how do you see how many hits are left from a certain requester on mturk?
To help bananas stay fresh when storing them in a cabinet,
pots and pans
How to eat a piece of pizza
How do you keep cords organized on your desk?
To change your shampoo so that it prevents dry hair,
How do I put together the phyllo dough when making baklava bites?
twig
How do you give the vodka caviar color?
desk
hot water
How can you tell someone is lying to you?
Protect head of disposable razors during travel.
I want to crush up Jolly Ranchers into tiny pieces.
To make homemade cake from boxed cake mix.
shining your gun
how to keep fish from sticking to the grill
How can I get cat poop out of my sofa?
To get relief from chapped lips.
Cut out a leather string.
wood
what is the formula of finding the area of a trapezium
How can you tell if a letter is junk mail or not?
How should you store clothes at hotels to minimize the risk of getting bedbugs on your clothes?
how do you clean a window?
How to massage away paint in your foot?
Trim the tree.
How to make you child eat their dinner.
how to make pumpkin seed candy
How to do a Burning Candle, Rising Water Experiment
How do you get gluten free bread to rise?
how do you save texts from being deleted?
how to mothproof clothing
How to reduce fear of public speaking?
eyeglasses
To cut a hole in a plastic tote that can fit a PVC pipe, you can
How to make lemongrass tea.
sticks
To remove gum from the bottom of shoes.
q-tip
To prepare to have a baby in the hospital,
To attach paper to a sheet of cardboard
What's the best tip for taking a one handed selfie?
To prevent breast cancer,
To get the paint on PVC pipe to harden.
Inhale scent to sleep faster.
How to roll a paper triangle up?
Avoid receiving a speeding ticket.
wash cloth
Make a filtering net.
Keep flies away from home.
To add a tangy, spicy taste to a hot dog, you can
wood
How do I prepare the crust for an oatmeal pie?
How to quickly dry paint on an object?
Make bathroom shelves.
To protect car side mirror when parking.
How do I set my watch forward an hour?
How to make Hot Lime tea at home.
how to shred tuna by hand
To tell which direction you're heading, you can
How to Recover From a Back Injury
How would you use a brick to open a bottle?
how to know you may have anxiety?
how can i make bread crumbs?
Designing and layout of a perimeter fence on your land.
paper towel
How to start a fire using damp wood?
To entertain children without electronics,
How to get a cat to return once it's disappeared?
Keep shoes smelling fresh.
Prevent water spots on kitchen faucet.
to distribute oil when seasoning a cast iron pan
How can I work with things in the kitchen?
What should I do if my phone charger isn't working?
To heal a stomach that suffers from acid reflux,
How To Make a Garlic Aioli
How To Make Cheesy Ground Beef Bell Peppers
To prepare cookies in the oven
To keep Boots and thick shoes dry and smelling fresh.
When I put the sauce on the chicken wings ?
make a window for the cardboard house
To create a professional appearance during a job interview,
where is the Phoenix constellation located
Who is the best person to give your phone to when you want them to take your photo?
To make a Fakers Square chocolate silk pie start with
Display family holiday cards.
How do I get a stuck bunt cake out of the pan when it is still warm?
How to Make an Extending Grabber
How do you smoke chicken wings?
How to vacuum the floor.
How do I locate the Columba constealltion
To eat an Oreo without making a mess.
How to plant a tree properly
how to bathe a chicken
To indicate wet patches on carpet.
soap
chainsaw
To join two bits of twisted wire together, you can
How do I make a time capsule
To crumble oreos for Oreo Popcorn.
Bake an assembled pie
To make a box out of panels.
How do you press rice krispy treat mixture into the pan?
To prepare cilantro for a meal
How to add coolant to your car.
oil
how to prepare jasmine rice for cooking
Make eggs last longer.
How often should I flip hamburger patties when making hamburgers?
Remove a wheel from a car.
Deodorize fish smell in kitchen.
To keep prawns from getting rubbery.
To get fish for my aquarium.
how do you drink wine?
How to sprout a peach seed.
How to turn on a gas stove
How do you drain boiled yams?
Heal sore throat.
how do you cool food down with your mouth?
What materials are needed to make floral tea lights?
how do you take a pill that dissolves?
To melt butter, you can
To prepare the ground beef for the shepards pie
How to prevent an icecream cone from leaking?
To test if something will float in a swimming pool, you can
To hold batteries in place when the  "door" is missing.
hammers
To hang a router on the wall.
Shorten length of screwdriver to fit in place of a belt prong
how to start a car.
mallet
When do I prepare fruit topping for a watermelon cake?
how do you count down from ten?
How to Make a Light Box Magic Science Experiment for Kids
How can I keep an ice pack from dripping?
scissors
mallet
To get rid of fruit flies naturally.
How do you make cinnamon simple syrup?
How do you make earrings?
How do you mail a letter?
How can I save money on wet wipes?
Make iced coffee.
Heat up leftovers evenly.
To prepare watermelon for blending.
What can you take as an antioxidant you can make at home?
Protect golf clubs.
pen tip
how do you have an anniversary with your partner?
To let your children paint without making any mess,
To create a hidden vessel to store valuable items.
How do you make buttermilk?
Make calcium supplement for dog food.
Make a pot of coffee.
to create a square indentation in the middle of the sliced bread
how to remove sneaker odor
To add detail to a fake guillotine blade.
Where does the holiday Festivus come from?
To prevent cake from sticking to the cake pan.
To avoid over reacting when your child makes you angry,
To bake the cheesecake batter.
How to prep yarn for dye.
Pot
Create patterned paint roller.
saw
To make some crafts with kids when you need glue, but don't have any.
How do you clean up large a spill on a linoleum tile in your home on the kitchen floor?
How do I resolve knotting or breaking thread when sewing with a sewing machine?
vine
To make a chili less spicy, you can
How to make leaf stencil for felt garland.
Make a tea fountain leak proof so it functions properly
How to remove water stains from leather couch?
a person
How can you flatten the tacos without a taco press?
how do you get drunk?
Use toilet paper rolls for in home bowling.
how do you turn off an xbox?
To defrost frozen meat safely,
keeping yourself motivated for exercise
To sift flour and cornstarch and remove lumps, you can
To save time when needing to wash dishes,
Emergency cat/small dog carrier.
How to bake a cake
How to Make Chemistry Crystals
How to remove a splinter
napkin
How should I pet my dog?
How do I support tomato plants so they don't sit on the ground?
What can you us to detect animals near your campsite?
To help get rid of motion sickness,
wood
How to pull a fuse out of the fuse panel of your car
how do you smile?
shoe sole
To find the end of a tape easily
Open a can of tuna.
Add barf bag to car.
To remove blood stains from fabric.
How to fill zombie hand plant pot.
How do I make a household cleaner that smells good?
To clean dirty windows if you don't have window spray,
construction paper
How to open a post on Reddit
Create gift wrap out of a chip bag.
How to make Rainbow Sangria
board
How do I write a love letter?
How can I prevent cake from coming apart while frosting?
How do you say goodbye in Swedish?
How to get a crispier crust on potatoes when baking?
How to Assemble a Salad Rose
make vegetarian spaghetti
How to ad oil to a car.
how do you leak information?
To make a sand cast aluminum ring holder,
how to wash rice
How to straighten your hair.
easily flavor sauces and stews
How to finish a knitted mouse toy.
how do you torch something?
How do you make water safe for drinking?
To understand how nuts turn into butter in a food processor.
dish towel
to improve math skills
Make a lemon spray to make your home smell good.
To add some color and texture to jell-o mix Popsicle.
To bread chicken ready for baking or frying
How to make an affordable wedding gift.
To prevent dough from over puffing in the oven
How do you prepare an iron for use for ironing a muslin photography backdrop?
What supplies are needed to make a rainbow in a bottle?
stone
how to clean your dryer vent from the outside
To know what your home smells like to guests,
How to know that the cake is fully cooked and ready to exit the oven?
What tools do you need to make a fashion backpack?
How can I cook shrimp?
How To make Vanilla Creme Brulee
How can I get marker spots out of my t shirt?
Get rid of wrinkles without an iron.
Remove burrs from dog's fur
To scrape freezer firmed chocolate truffle mixture into balls.
what is a nonstick pan used for?
floss
To cut leaves out of fabric, you can
food
To remove a metal wheel that's bolted down onto plastic, you can
To make wasps go away when having an outdoor event,
How do you determine when to harvest your cranberries?
knives
How can I warm my brain up so I can think better?
To ease a migraine when you already have one.
How to Remove Ink Stains from Wood Furniture
Homemade peanut butter cookies.
What ingredients do I need to make vanilla ice cream?
To stuff a duct tape dummy to use as part of a costume, you can
wooden spoon
How do you make a pattern for a book pendant?
To wipe up excess oil from a cast iron pan after seasoning
How do I make some water boil faster?
How can I get a cut sandwich to stay together?
To fold ingredients when a recipe calls for it.
how do you end a fight?
mirror
To secure metal wire around a bolt.
Make fabric cup coaster.
To attach a paper template to a block of wood, you can
Sun
To skip forward five seconds on a Youtube video,
Fix hair split ends.
To ensure you are welding pieces together at the proper angle, you can
Repel ants from pet food.
To toast bread,
To hold curtains in place when they aren't in use, you can
To remove blood stains from clothing,
trucks
How to sand the edges of the wooden boards.
pitcher
how do you check the time on a macbook pro?
How can I suspend a tarp over a hammock?
Can you predict the weather by looking at clouds?
How do you make a classic tuna fish sandwich?
knuckles
How to easily remove a piece of paper towel with one hand?
remove fingerprints from walls.
How can I keep my Bagel fresh at the office?
One wants to make a Marvel-themed mask.
To eat out to a nice restaurant for cheap,
Prevent plastic danger for animals.
how do you smoothen your nails?
What is a Festivus pole used for?
To get a double-double in a basketball game,
To measure the link pin in a bike wheel
how to store pots and pans while camping
To easily determine who is calling you,
A tarp
how do I use coconut oil for my gum health?
How can I keep PH balanced in canned goods?
Refurbish an old ugly desk chair.
How do you create tertiary colours for painting?
To install a CPU into a computer.
how do you put blush on?
To bring a pot of water to a boil.
To bake pigs in a blanket, you can
Water
To make strawberries less sour,
How to make homemade candy hearts candy.
Prevent pancakes from sticking to pan.
how to make mirrors shine
Patch holes in tarp to make waterproof.
To make a gunk remover with materials you already have on hand.
How can I cool my home when It's hot outside?
What ingredients do I need to recreate Red Lobster biscuits?
To make grilled cheese more moist
how do you spam someone?
To light up a full room with a small light,
To boil kumquats to soften them for pickling
What is the best way to reward kids?
How long should wood glue set to ensure a firm hold of the wood?
Dice an onion.
pipe
how to fix a toilet that fills off and on by itself
Repair a small tear in a window screen.
Make banana split.
how do you scale a building?
knead pizza dough to prepare to cook
how do you pinch someone?
computer
To amplify your phone's speakers.
How do I figure out a budget?
What temperature should I take my kid to the doctor
Use egg alternate for cookies.
phone
Hang your jeans like a pro
Make a cannabis pipe from alluminum foil.
How do I coat the bundle with wax ?
To make butter become a liquid to use it in a project, you can
To provide necessary nutrients to garden vegetables,
What is a good substitute for DIY cat food when your cat food cupboard is bare?
To carve out the shape of a template from a wooden board, you can
What tools can I use to scrape out the inside of a pumpkin?
Should I leave fallen fruits on the ground as  these help add organic beneficial materials to the soil?
How much scent do you add to candles
What is an herb that spreads quickly.
To grease a baking dish
Where can reclaimed wood be found?
how to wash a cup?
microscope
How to properly wash your clothes in the washing machine.
to avoid bubble when you are polishing your nails
pan
How do I keep my violin from drying out?
mortar and pestle
To measure a precise amount of baking soda, you can
Make vegan hot chocolate.
can opener
screwdriver
How do you cook french fries so that you have fewer calories?
How do you protect food in the wild?
To make flowers last longer.
Make french toast
How do you prepare for a destination city in your study abroad?
How to cut an acrylic board?
How can you extend the battery life on your cell phone?
How can I carry a large sheet of plywood or drywall by myself?
To prevent headaches caused by eye strain,
To bind fabric before putting it through a sewing machine.
Reinforce the glued on face of the cabinet drawer
To make a mold for homemade candy bars, you can
Restart the body after long night of studying.
How to dry wet kitchen floor.
How to make Blackberry tarts.
To make it easier to insert a screw into a board,
Combine the ingredients to make the dough
To tighten a nut
To wash potatoes for frying,
paint eyes on rock
To make a back brace more comfortable to wear.
Increase growth of garden.
Fasten the legs to the apron with fastening screws.
When cutting bread
How do you make a pattern for gauntlet mitts?
how do you warm food up?
To prepare coconut flakes for baking.
What do you need to make a bicycle flower bell?
Learn how to prepare the ground to set up a tent on it.
measuring 2 feet
How do I grind the concrete properly when making a concrete countertop>
To keep your lawn at an attractive length,
how do you stop a heart from beating?
How to Make Apple Roses
To cut a watermelon open without a knife.
Make leather shoes easier to wipe.
baseball bat
To bend a nail or copper wire into an L-shape
How to make dough not stick to your pie pan?
To make a healthy vegetable smoothie.
To make the domino shape cookies out of the  domino cookie dough
Add googly eyes to a paper plate craft
How to identify Polygon
To marinate meat.
How to glue your saw blade attachment together?
To find stuffing for the plushie pillow from objects around the house.
To make sure the dough doesnt expand out side the flowerpot
How do you make a smore?
To get stuck on food off of pans.
To Make 25 dollars.
how to get perfectly shaped poached eggs
how do you put on a sports bra?
How can you see something if you forgot your glasses?
Fix the hole in the screen in the window
To hide the letters of a message you don't want read,
How do I get the lint trap clean on my dryer?
To help keep your carpets clean,
How can I keep my cheesecake from cracking while baking?
Attaching hinges
Easy veggie soup.
Keep from sawing fingers off on a table saw while guiding wood over the blade.
How can you prevent the drill from slipping away while drilling copper plate?
Make a pop noise by mixing two chemicals together.
soften butter
How to make Sesame Potato Chips
How do you fit more devices in an electrical outlet?
to sort dirty laundry
How to break down a cardboard box?
Treat puffy eyes.
How to make deviled eggs.
Judges
To save on buying water,
How can you easily open a medicine cap that is childproofed?
how do you dry your hands in a public bathroom?
To determine how much conditioner you should use,
Remove burned image from TV.
How to store batteries?
Treat constipation.
To fix stuck drawers.
To prepare the scallions for kimchi,
garbage bin
how to make acorn squash with rice
how to freeze tomatoes
how do you crouch down?
how do you keep a tattoo on your skin?
how do you follow a playlist maker on spotify?
How to color beach hut.
Make oatmeal.
How can I remove permanent marker stain from walls?
An instant pot recipe calls for water, should it be hot or cold water?
To check the internal temp of the deep fried turkey
where is The constellation Vulpecula located
To cut lines into a plastic bottle,
Gluing the magnets for the rack
Make 3 ingredient flourless muffins
matches
measuring cup
Prevent gift wrap paper from rolling.
How to make a bat for Halloween decoration.
How do you take care of potted orchids?
how to secure a closet rod
How can I get rid of static cling while brushing my hair?
How can I remove snow from my car without a snow brush?
To design an exercise routine for upper body you can do at home.
How can I temporarily seal a broken window?
How do I cut a potato accordian style?
egg carton
Hold nails with a hammer.
marker
How to paint ceramic pottery.
basket
How to marinate jerky.
How to Care for a Pet Duck
One seeks to make a movie costume for a baby.
Add shine to living room hardwood floors.
how ot make mashed potatoes with skin
How can I detect hard to find nails embedded in wood?
To cook burgers to perfection on the grill
how to better understand a recipe?
To add filing to make stress balls from balloons.
To melt honey that has crystallized,
To get your education paid for,
how can I tell which planet has the most moons
a match
Make a wall shelf.
how do you run a card as debit?
How can I get crayon off of my walls?
how do you close a zip lock bag?
To keep swim goggles in place when swimming.
How can I keep pizza warm on the way home?
how to play old maid
How to remove pit from avocado.
What is the most important factor when you choose the composition of Kreg screws?
What is the best way to keep bears away from your tent when camping?
How to dress in home?
How do you remove size stickers from new clothing?
saw
What can you use to make something reflective.
To make ground beef tacos,
How can I increase anti depression hormones naturally?
To layer the shepards pie
how do you use chalk?
how do you bump an order at a restaurant?
how to saute?
How to put wooden box together using wood squares.
To grate and juice a lemon.
What can you use to cut the wrapping paper into desired shape
flower
How to fix a key holder on to the wall?
Use baby wipes as a cool down tool
To tenderize the steak prior to cooking
How to increase the volume on Youtube
Where should I knead my bread when making focaccia bread.
how to open an water bottle?
how do you play fetch?
Get rid of a mosquito bite.
how do you value something?
To drill a small hole in the center of an aluminum can, you can
Create a bar for a campus apartment that looks highly technical but is easy to do.
How can I make ant poison at home?
To thread a needle,
To properly, thoroughly apply bug spray while camping,
TO secure your home at night,
How to moisturize your skin after a shower?
How to remove paint chips or wheel rust?
To connect two pieces of wire together,
How to fold pants.
To be notified any time your favorite celebrities tweet something out,
To hold aluminum straight so it can be bent, you can
To make a laser cut bracelet you can use
To grow a watermelon.
To make an ink stamp from a rubber sheet.
how to get juicy poultry
How do you prevent scars from forming?
Garage
Once you have applied etching cream to glass, what must you do before you can begin etching?
How do you peel onions?
How to make cover and back of mini notepad.
how to make apple pie nog
To top the pizza,
How do I move the onions to a bowl after I'm done cutting them when making beef and bourbon pie?
How to make Cheesy Chex Mix
How do you ripen an unripe persimmon?
To chop cabbage, you can
To combine pecans, sugar, and flour, you can
Practice deep breathing
To fix some smudged frosting on a cake,
When infusing wood with fat, to ensure that the fat stays melted while soaking into the wood, you can
To hold fabric in place before sewing it, you can
leek and potato soup
how to use a computer mouse
Best way to spin a cylindrical object.
To safe time when wanting an ice cold bottle of water,
How would I secure carbon ropes and wires with duct tape to sleeping bag padding?
How do I make the mold for casting my coaster ?
What materials are used to create a spooky, witch-like Halloween spice jar?
To wash strawberries
Make foot massage roller.
Treat bad headaches.
How do I draw a 45 cm diameter circle on the leather ?
To fill up a water bottle,
hide a pimple
How to keep Celery Fresh
To turn wooden slats into a frame, you can
how do you meet a goal
an axe
How do you yodel?
Blender
how to keep cheese from drying out on a hot sandwich
How to wash curtains and blinds?
How do you make biodegradable starter pots out of coffee sleeves?
how do you let a hit expire on mturk?
How can I germinate apple seeds?
How to make chili.
sock
how do you use toothpaste?
To separate a yolk from an egg white,
How to prevent a mirror from getting smudges?
How can I fix holes in an old tarp?
How can I clean grease in a sink drain?
To mix other oil paints to create green,
jar
how to make pecan-praline brownies
How do I know when ground beef is done for homemade meat sauce?
tire pump
How do you throw a horseshoe?
How to make Reese's Pieces vanilla Ice cream at home.
Tie a scarf around your neck.
Clean the bottom of the underground pool.
chopsticks
How to synchronize the audio with the video on VLC media player
How can I neatly store my roll of trash bags?
To paint a toy shotgun as part of a project to make it look steampunk
How to prevent spills and damage when painting an object?
How do you transfer an artistic ink design onto a piece of wood?
To melt the butter needed for the  cinnamon bread
How can you move (remove) bees without killing them?
aluminum foil
cup
To salvage books you have read,
What can I use to help pour hot liquid into a jar?
What materials are needed to make a Spiderman mask/
To make LEDS visible after placing them under a plastic cover, you can
How to make curry potato chips
How can I make a cheap but cute towel hanger?
How to paint cabinets
How can I lighten my hair at home?
To build a PVC pipe wire holder for the TV.
To clean the uppers and tongue of a sneaker.
Minimize inflammation of cold sore.
To tighten a wrench.
medicine cabinet
How to separate a piece of paper into 2 equal pieces, cleanly, without scissors?
How do you make simple syrup in the microwave?
how do you carpet a house?
To ensure beading tulip keeps its cup shape while creating it.
Make boots water proof when crossing water.
How to drain a can of beans
How to keep a wooden toy from falling over when on a stand or shelf?
how do you make a doggy door?
Loosen stuck drawers.
how to make apple pear punch
Prevent rust from building up on objects.
how do you pop a pimple?
Make french fried potatoes.
Get a cool sleep on summer days.
To soothe the symptoms of a headache,
How to infuse pumpkin flavor into coffee?
How can I get my wooden guitar to shine more and look better?
To test a homemade facial mask in an inconspicuous spot in case of irritation
To sear meat
To hang a shelf on a cinde rblock wall
To remove the exterior frame from a chair
how to clean ice trays
filet a fish
edge of table
Shampoo hair without water.
To keep boots made of soft fabric upright,
what do you use to tie the herbs up from your garden before hang dry?
To make sure the barbecue sauce is smooth.
To make sure the matches stick out of the glass bottles matchstick holder
To make a lion house cherry chocolate cake,
To screen record on android phone.
How to build a cabin?
To help relieve a headache without taking pain medicine.
To watch movies that are hard to find online,
how to make fancy piped flowers
what can be used to make vegan meringue?
how to get long-lasting lip color
how to anchor long stems
To stay safe from animals on a hike,
masking tape
paintbrush
Defrosting Chicken Breasts in the Refrigerator
get the most juice out of citrus.
To make a dinner with four ingredients,
preparing the bottles
How To Bait a Fruit Fly Trap
how to apply beads to a quilting frame for a craft
To uninstall a software from a windows computer.
One seeks to make a winter toy.
To turn one length of fabric into two smaller pieces that are identical in size, you can
To leave people in stiches as a comedian.
When I'm making no boil easy lasagna, what do I use for the sauce?
What is the best type of maple tree to tap for maple syrup?
how do I make easy peanut butter bars?
How do you get penalized for pass interference in football?
Pack bagels for lunch.
To cut a irregular shape out of wood for a plastic army man costume
Can I make my own stress tea?
To add natural color to your wood without using store bought stains.
crowbar
To measure where to cut based on a template, you can
How to clean a computer screen.
Using Effective Study Techniques
sand paper
How do you cook sliced ginger in water?
fingers
Mosquito bite?
telescope
how to make a mortadella with pepper relish
eyes
How to apply cologne?
blade
To determine how big to make a hat so that it will fit you, you can
To carry a dozen eggs with you with little space,
How do you wash pillows?
how do you put a helmet on?
how do you cook a turkey?
How do you clean wood floors?
How should I cut pantyhose to make it into a bag for holding slivers of bar soap to use on my skin?
Make serving snack tray.
pole
reed mat
Freeze baked potatoes
video
To easily cut up grapes for toddlers.
How can you stop being flatulent.
table top
what to use in place of a cocktail shaker
kerchief
How can I keep my doors from slamming loudly?
How to make Hershey's Mr. Good Bar chocolate Ice cream at home.
Make a nice path in the back yard.
To get a perfect 300 in bowling,
superman
How to cut open the top of a helium bottle?
How do you safely let your dog ride up front in your car?
vise grip
To prevent kabob sticks from burning while on the grill,
How to wash a dish?
Tame fly away strands of hair.
hold a post earring on without a back
how do I locate the Dorado constellation
How to lock the taskbar on Windows 10
How can you avoid insect repellent dripping in your eyes when you sweat while hiking?
What supplies do you need to make a candle holder from an old CD?
How do you pull to the side of the road with a flat tire?
how do you clean your windshield?
How can I get my jewelry to shine more?
How to make Seedless Boysenberry Syrup at home.
How can I prevent acne breakouts from occurring on my face or different parts of my body?
How can I keep a fence post plumb and in position while setting it?
make pickles
How do you make a good white russian?
How do I make a caramel to eat with a nutella mousse?
spider repellent
Fire
How can I purify cheap alcohol such as vodka?
Fall asleep faster.
where is the Triangulum constellation located
To achieve a brown monkey color for the monkey cupcake
Can I make sherbert with ginger and pineapple?
Remove the legs of the binder clips
how to cut the acid in tomato sauce
What are the steps to properly caring for a scooter?
stick
Safely store kitchen knifes out of reach of little fingers and hands.
To loosen stuck drawers in old furniture
how to make a spicy thai dressing
metal bucket
bumper sticker
How to prepare meat to be dry aged?
bench
container
Clean oil painting.
To treat bad breath before work,
ice
How do you prepare a plot to grow cranberries?
How can I saute mushrooms in Sherry?
pipe
stone
tarp
How can you more quickly pour water from a bottle?
To make ice water in your water bottle easily,
To boil rice on a stove.
make chinese sausge rice pancakes
net
Get a deal on TV packages.
What to use for foot pads when you're making your own kiteboard?
vinegar
How to make clean jeans without washing them?
how do you hold your breath?
How to unclog a backed up toilet.
Nail
how to make a macaroni salad
To whiten your teeth naturally.
How to store lipstick in a makeup box?
To get the red out of your eyes,
how can I make sparkly strawberry ice cubes?
tumbler
How do you get a perfect score in bowling?
How do you dress appropriately to catch a honeybee in your house without getting stung?
How do you make a clothespin snowman?
Loosen plaque in teeth.
how do you do something sloppy?
fire
To shape a knife handle
How to get a ball point pen writing again when it stops, even though there is lots of ink in the pen?
To keep from getting cavities,
make a copy
How to make a simple loom.
Make frozen banana pops
To cut carrots into thin strips, you can
numbers
Re pot a plant.
how do you condone something?
How to best store chocolate dough for long term usage?
tin foil
how do you stop hunger?
Where can I find a polar bear
To separate the outer skin of a banana so that you can stuff things inside of it, you can
How do I clean my computer monitor with toothpaste?
To prevent burning cheese when cooking a dish with cheese on top,
To sneak snacks into the movie theater that you are going to.,
remove permanent marker from wood
Identify optimal sleeping position on bed.
How can I make flowers last longer?
get rid of tough stains on fabric furniture
How do I make a trick exploding soda bottle?
To make precise holes in a papercraft helmet.
mouth
What supplies are needed to make a recycled light bulb Christmas tree?
Soothe skin burn.
How do you store a spare tire?
To make butter cookies, what kind of butter do I need.
Add fragrance to bath.
To get a folded piece of paper to stay together, you can
how do you put out a fire?
To disinfect fruits and vegetables using easily obtainable, safe chemicals.
To clean up a park easily
jackhammer
How do I keep my favorite couch fur free?
make breakfast sandwich
cup
Make a pet monitor.
To prevent tarp from tearing when using a hole punch on it, you can
how do you save breast milk?
To make Papier-mâché without any glue on hand,
How to make Chocolate walnut Rum fudge at home.
Pre-warm a bed before going to sleep.
How to make beef jerky.
Organize plastic container lids.
How to close a pen after writing?
How do you make beads for homemade necklaces?
use a tide pod
how to start a motorcycle
How to have a light source while camping?
To ensure safety when putting wood through a table saw.
how do you pick at food?
What do I do with the dough for mooncakes once it has been kneaded?
cheese cloth
Dispose off left over paint.
Make an old shirt into a tie front tank.
To prepare a metal lid to be drilled in
How do you store fresh, homemade jam in a jar?
How to see an interactive image of the world on Google Maps
How to purify your water manually?
how do you use siri?
wite-out
key
how do you use coffee grinds in a k-cup coffee maker?
How to make Eucalyptus Candles at home.
To clean a penny
How can you select the best camera?
Make a book.
How to draw a perfect circle without a compass?
stove top
How do I organize around my home
I can't remember what the name is but is there a plant that smells like pineapples?
how do you order takeout?
What ingredients are needed to make Savory French Toast?
How do you make a milkshake?
Eliminate odors in the garbage can.
How can I make a bag dispenser holder?
To prepare the colored rainbow cookie dough for cooking
how to calculate macros
How can I dust, keep my hands clean, and get everything up quickly?
How to get jello out of a plastic mold.
To prevent the rainbow bread from sticking to your work surface while kneading
To help calm down a panicking dog,
To load a CD into a computer,
What is the best way to quietly go up a set of creaky stairs?
To get the best deal on household supplies and groceries,
How do you break a dogbane stalk open in order to access the core wood fiber?
What item is needed to make a plastic herb name tag?
How do I prepare the ingredients in the instant pot when making dulce de leche?
ocean
For teachers open house
To choose a good tree for climbing,
What to use to polish copper tubing?
how do you orchestrate something?
How to fry eggplant so it is not soggy?
If you forget to take out your milk and eggs for room temp for the spanish bread
How do I keep track of my menstruation?
index card
maek an island mule
skillet
remote
Soap made from soap base and essence with microwave and a mold.
When making gauntlets what sort of gloves should I use?
How can I cool down my coffee mug at home if it's too hot?
To distribute the melted almond bark so it coats the popcorn and oreos.
Hit a baseball with a baseball bat.
How can you give some variety to ordinary sliced bananas?
What kind of paper should you use.
How to Make Model Magic Texture Stamps
How do I decide which things can be stored in a camping tent?
How to get ready for bed
To remove nails from reclaimed wood,
How to insure a child's roof is child proofed?
How to clean a fish bowl
how do you go down stairs?
Create a leather book cover.
Prepare a wood surface for spray painting.
how to make sea salt caramels
How do I drain the potatoes?
how do you know what page you're on in a book
how do you hang a picture on the wall?
How to hem pants leg
low fat substitute for coconut milk
duct tape
How to make Chocolate Banana pudding ice cream at home.
how do you time something with your phone?
What sort of soil do you need in order to grow a giant pumpkin?
how to make iced coffee
how to remove wine stains from carpet
how do I cook banana squash
To cut the face out of an artificial pumpkin, you can
What type of saw will cut a hexagon from a rectangular piece of wood?
Hang a picture frame with ease.
Make your own hot sauce.
To water the weeping pussy willow tree.
To turn bananas into a smooth consistency, you can
How to block someone on Whatsapp
To make a dish that uses peppers spicier, you can
Prevent tall boots from falling over.
how do you eat a pickle?
One wants a unique style for their desk.
To iron on the patch to the sleeve,
Surprise your young guests at a birthday party with special gifts that are fun to open.
How can I clean contacts that have gotten cloudy?
To attach a piece of paper to a yardstick, you can
How to make french fries
What is the best technique to mix ingredient with ground beef for meatballs?
What should you be wearing when applying spray paint?
make honey mustard dressing
q-tip
Make a container for disposed insulin syringes.
To make glass into sea glass using a rock tumbler.
What toppings can I use on a hamburger?
How to bake a potato.
To close the metal rings in chainmail.
peel almond skins
how do you boil potatoes?
To wash the rubber rings made from the bike inner tube.
What ingredients do you need to make homemade Altoids?
plastic wrap
how to level out cake batter
how do you move a car?
To clean burnt food off a pan.
What is a popular item for weights in a pattern weight?
How to make the bottom of your DIY pallet log sled?
sock
What can I put in a hummingbird feeder if I don't have nectar?
Preparing hard boiled eggs.
To conceal your blue pens from people who don't return them,
Bring sauce to dinner party.
how do you make a bed?
How can I safely clean undermy keyboard?
To prevent boxes breaking open when transporting heavy items,
how do you open a safe?
Make a peep and twinkie car
To chill fruit salad before serving it to others,
how do you wear a coat?
Easy way to soften butter.
To soft boil an egg,
How do you to make a paper airplane that goes far?
Increase life span of seasonal clothing.
how to make amatriciana
Remove stench from vomit.
To naturally soften clothes in the washer,
how do you pitch a ball?
sound
How to Make Float Racers
To allow gelatin to bloom, you should
pitcher
How do I learn a new subject
make a wild cherry drink
how do you peel orange skin?
How to cut your plastic sheet?
What kitchen tools do I need to make banana ice cream?
How do you get a strike in bowling?
how to clean a ceiling fan with a pillowcase
When making folds in leather, remember that
To make the color green,
To identify burl when looking in the woods,
To purchase gasoline at a gas pump,
To let mat rest properly when it's done cooking.
Peel a boiled egg.
how to unclog a glue gun
How do you pick nettles?
How do I clean a car windshield after going over roads that are semi paved and have oil sprayed on them.
How to make hearty American Buffalo Stew.
To improve your blood pressure,
stove
What do I need to make my own carpet deodorizer?
How to make the handle of a viking axe floating shelf to be fixed on a wall?
What are some different types of coffee roasts?
How can I clean my blinds
how to find morels
How long do you bake cookies?
how do you finish reading a book?
Line dances 
To bend a metal rod precisely to make a hinge.
How to make toast in a toaster.
drawer
To prevent clothes from shrinking,
how do you work on a batch on mturk?
How do you select items to go into a emergency dog bag?
How can you survive an encounter with a Wild Mountain Lion?
To give the Italian zeppole its unique chewy structure
how do you play a harmonica?
Clean your clothing iron
How can I cook bacon for a recipe?
how to select a fresh christmas treet
What supplies are needed to make Easter inspired candle holders?
How do I put the image onto the coaster?
Easy light box!
to paint a mini tackle box.
How to balance a wobbly uneven table?
How do you add scents to melted candle wax?
When making a bone necklace, what is a good alternative to using bone from a butcher?
A good way to use up leftover cake.
How to pack breakable knick knacks when moving.
How to cook hotdogs
How to Saw Lumber
How to make a cheap black light costume?
how to open a can with a tab
rake
to show you dislike a performance?
how to properly hold the knife
Make your own applesauce.
How to wash clothes in washer.
how to make poblano pepper mashed potatoes
Best air supply for a home.
How to remove white rings that form on wooden flooring?
how do you initiate a command using a laptop keyboard?
To pour a drink of elderflower cordial,
Soothe puffy eyes.
Adding plant lights to shelves.
metal bowl
To melt beeswax and shea butter mixture without burning them or getting water in them.
To prevent tights from falling down,
trowel
Paint one part of a piece of wood while leaving the remainder untouched.
DIY floating ping pong table
Reduce craving to use phone when charging.
how do you store something?
How to decorate for the Holidays.
What should you do with damaged candy canes?
strawberries
How to prevent cement from getting salt damage?
To simmer onions in a frying pan.
To clean up old silverware and make it shiny again.
Check to see if meat is done without losing juice.
Feed wild birds birdseed.
how do you 'peel' out of a drive way?
Reduce paint fume smell.
Prevent stubbed toes in bedroom.
To tighten a screw
To attach the base of a flashlight to a sheet of plastic, you can
To make a sauce for enchiladas.
To get the tools to drill a hole  for  your  router  cables.
Prevent crying when chopping onions.
Remove tough stains from clothing.
How do you melt cheese on nachos?
What can I do when My sharpie Pen dries out?
How To make Filling for Raspberry Cloud Cups,
To glue three layers of plywood together for a sturdy tabletop.
make an easy fruit smoothie
What safety gear should you wear when making flash cotton?
easily remove dough from hands
How do you hollow out the wood for a beer koozie?
How can I keep my controller from powering down when I'm not using it?
To fix curdled custard.
To stamp patterns in cookie dough.
Clean your toilets.
How to cut the mesh for your DIY bbq?
To hold a marshmallow over a fire for roasting,
To peel the papery skin from ginger.
How can you quickly get gum off the bottom of your shoe?
To make bed time more enjoyable for children,
how do you kick a ball?
How do I clean my bathroom mirror?
how to make bubbles
To store your cable in your backpack or suitcase
Make a kids book holder.
To cut a potato into wedges.
To avoid other poker players figuring out what kind of hand you have,
How can you heighten the effects of Marijuana?
What ingredients are needed to make Ham Wrapped Meatballs with Parmigiano Reggiano?
How to infuse alcohol into at-home ginger beer?
How to stop pain from a sore throat?
How to remove difficult decals.
To save money when pulling out cash from a bank account,
How to sew the inter tube onto your socks?
burn paper
To humanely kill an insect for a child's bug collection,
To paint the wooden iPhone case.
To make a bug proof tent for a child,
To remove the zombie burger from the pan after cooking completely
how to put in contacts?
Avoid sugar from sticking to measuring cup.
What materials and tools are needed to make a tea light chandelier?
Make ice cream sandwich.
How can I clean my couch
How to peel a banana?
mop
placemat
Make a stair slide.
Make vintage plant pots.
spoons
how to make cheesy rice
What supplies are needed to make a faux shell chandelier?
how to clean a grill grate
How can I keep cords organized?
socket
Get ride of mosquitoes.
To make a dish spicier, you can
To hold a piece of wood in place while you saw through it, you can
tissues
How do I sand the wall when making a magnetic drywall?
How to make Pomegranate syrup at home.
How to make Red Velvet Fudge at home.
how do you put a rope on soap?
To water plants, you can
Make an art bib for kids.
How to Treat Ich or Ick (Ichthyophthirius Multifilis) in an Aquarium
What is a quick way to find where to hang a closet rod when making a hanging plant headboard?
Prevent tea bag from falling.
How to secure a spectacle arm that's come loose?
how do I use toothpaste for pimples?
metal spatula
Make a oil burning lamp with a large rock.
how do you poke something?
how do you clean the toilet?
To make homemade magnetic silly putty,
How to quickly make tzatziki?
Hanging a Zoetrope
To eat rice with chopsticks,
Steps to chill pie crust.
clean your makeup brush
how do you make monsster cookie bars?
How to cash a check.
What does it mean to snare an animal?
How do you move an oven rack to a different position?
sleeves
how do you put a dress on?
Avoid bugs when camping.
How to Form Easy Flatbreads
What should I wear when working on a soldering project?
Clean your wooden cutting board.
To avoid snake bites when hiking,
To prepare ingredients for Matzo Ball Soup.
bowl
To form rock in rock paper scissors.
To trap flies and other bugs in your kitchen,
How do you use a hot glue gun?
To diet for fat loss,
To draw a perfect circle on a bucket to cut out
how do you fix a flat tire?
Get VLC to randomly play through a set of videos.
Make a reusable toilet seat liner.
Clear your nose to make it easier to breathe.
How to dry towels in an electric dryer.
How can you concentrate and come up with ideas for a work or school project?
To make a grilled cheese when out of butter,
To catch a squirrel, you can
How can I secure a template image to vinyl for carving?
How to Get Your First Tattoo
how to identify mushrooms you can eat
How to grow tomatoes in pots.
Make ice packs for kids.
how do you get rid of soap on dishes?
To start the hanging modular lamp shade project
Sew your own clothes by hand.
How to lock your bike to a bike stand.
To keep avocados fresh in the refrigerator,
how do you peel a banana?
to sift flour without a sifter
how to make a zebra look on wood
what to use to check your steaks and seafood for doneness
wash cloth
To sand corks to prime them for a cork board,
how do I make a boozy peach dressing?
To sweeten bread after it's cooked, you can
To keep cake moist when rolling.
What can I cook cookies on?
To put a worm on a fishing hook.
how do you use a toilet in a bathroom?
To cut off a piece of food while using chopsticks,
To play Superman 64.
To repurpose a lipstick tube, you can
How do you prepare boiled yams to be cooked?
To rinse potatoes, you can
how to get the most juice out of citrus
To mix flour and salt so that it becomes fluffy and fine, you can
Thaw frozen salmon
how to maximize herbs
how do you plastic off windows?
how do you find a lost phone in your house?
How to decorate the front yard.
Make a declutter game plan
Where can I put a cake to cool down?
How to disquise the taste of vegan bacon.
To prevent your pet from harming furniture with their claws,
How to paint a door.
Prepare pond for goldfish
glasses
How do you lock you laptop?
To drain bacon after frying it in a skillet,
How to plant small seeds easily.
How to alter old beer caps into a fantasy game currency.
To start a garden without pots for seed starters.
To make the white of the eyes appear black
how to make stuffed apricots
DIY face mask for dry skin
how do you bleed out?
to water seal a toggle switch.
To apply the Beard, Eyebrows and Face Makeup for a costume.
How to wear a helmet?
netting
How to patch a leaking bike tube
To make a base for paper mache, you can
how to make a design on heat transfer vinyl
rope 
does cooking spray break down hard water particles?
Promote eye lash length.
needle
To keep lettuce crisp in your garden as it grows,
To easily make pattern pieces for a cosplay vest.
Remove bags under eyes.
How to remove a screw that's stuck.
To save money for an upcoming trip.
How can I revive stale tortilla chips?
shot glass
how to make sausage-apple biscuit
how do you make a squeaky toy squeak?
To make wooden shelving for my room.
bucket
How to cut into a watermelon rind?
To make a piping bag,
How to Make Easy Onion Rings
To stop wrapping paper from unrolling itself while in storage,
Make a crown.
Make a small rock garden.
To remove grime from a stainless steel dishwasher.
To attach the cord of a lamp socket to a piece of plumbing pipe, you can
To keep glasses from steaming up.
How to dig hole for a fire pit.
How to create a long leash for your dog?
To easily make a template for a hot air balloon,
To sharpen a stick, you can
To prevent moisture rings from appearing on your table,
Quickly hull strawberries.
How do I clean sticky vinyl shelves?
How to cut fingernails with a nail clipper
What can I use to keep delicates safe in the washer?
How much do I inflate the balloon when making yarn ball art?
To chop onions
how to make tomato-rosemary rice
netting
To cut large pieces of plywood, you can
To prepare tomatoes to be chopped, you can
how do you submerge something in water?
How do you create a small hole for plants in a board?
how do you trample over someone?
Prevent day naps from interfering with primary night sleep.
How to I get the pieces wire  ?
To make the edges of aluminum sheet metal round.
how do you plow something?
How can you get rid of any pests or critters that are in my fur coat?
To get a birdie in gold,
To core apples,
How to glue together your cardboard sniper rifles?
To  communicate over long distances.
How to close up a home made empanada.
How do you package something to ship it?
high chair
Where can I see sharks
how do you dry a painting?
How do I make a chocolate glaze for chocolate peppermint brownies?
To produce dye of certain colors when out in nature,
How to teach your rabbit to spin in circles around you?
trash can
shoe
To prevent dye from getting on your skin, you can
To get an inkpen to write on paper on a hard surface,
To scald milk, you can
ladder
How to sand top of wooden table.
How to remove set-in laundry stains.
How to make polymer clay look like water.
make cabinet speaker
Scales
How do I wash my hair?
flashlight
Mount bobble head on a clean plastic car dashboard
how to wash your hair
How to make french toast
To attach two braided sections of wire together, you can
To store necklaces.
pens
how do you roll a ball?
To create more storage in a milk crate bookcase.
Mix Special Liquid to make Glow in the Dark Bouncy Egg
If you smell natural gas while baking in a gas oven,
Treat dry or damage hair with bananas
How much thermal paste should be applied on a CPU before installing the CPU fan?
how do you use chip dip?
What tools do I need?
How do I apply long-lasting liquid lipstick evenly?
Protect glass cups when moving.
crayon
how to calculate water pressure
To cook noodles in a pot until they are al dente, you can
Make napkin rings for kids picnic.
foot
To give Hungarian plum dumplings a breaded coating.
How to Earn an MBA While Working
How can I scare my sister?
To sanitize a kitchen counter with bleach.
To connect two pieces of pvc pipe together, you can
To personalize a laptop without a fancy sleeve,
Make triangle toy holder.
To cut out  heart shape for the inside of the cake
Hide money in purse.
To secure the Paracord iPhone case to the phone.
How do you remove drawers from a dresser?
To mash cream cheese to a softer texture, you can
To prepare strawberries to be eaten, you can
Frozen dishes
How do you get rid of ants?
How to kill a wasp's nest
mug
How to grow garlic at home
Evenly firm or hard boiled eggs
how do you separate string cheese?
To make sure the cookies expand evenly over the muffin tin
How do you store CDs?
how do you slash someones tires?
Easily Pit Cherries
How to fix pulled out screws in wood.
Where can I get the steel for making a homemade knife ?
To impress someone during an interview,
how do you clutter something?
How to make DIY Paper Leaves
To add numbers to a piece of paper, you can
potholder
dish towel
One wants a good external holder for a beaded bracelet.
How do you mark cardboard for cutting it up?
To thread a needle,
rug
How can I retrieve a Word File that I forgot to save?
stapler
how to make jamaican jerk seasoning
To make stilts you can walk with for a costume out of recycled material.
How to smooth out vase made from wood blocks.
Attract a lot of ants
If you have an allergy to nuts, do you have to mention it to your restaurant server?
how to kill odors in workout clothes
How to take out weeds from the garden?
sponge
What's the best topping for chocolate cream pie?
how do you turn a car off?
To oil the surface of a cast iron pan
How can I open a letter so that no one will know I unsealed the envelope?
mixer
To fry an egg into a neat circle,
snips
To extract a splinter
Make a wall calendar.
To ensure you position LED lights behind your TV uniformly.
how do you rupture something?
To attract more women
how to make eggplant with pesto
How to make frosting.
To 3D print the Moire pattern of your choice.
Remove the skin from a baby Bell pepper
How to Prepare Dry Ingredients to Make Crayon Playdough
How can I get someone to stop texting me after I ask them to stop?
To prepare paper to make it into an spinning optical toy.
How do you decorate upcycled pirate coin treasure?
To save a stale muffin.
To ensure holes drilled in a wall are aligned with each other.
To make store the pizza cookies
How can I make my hair darker?
Bullet
rubber
To attach plastic tarp to a wooden frame for a greenhouse, you can
How to wash hands in the sink.
To get the best rental car rate,
Shampoo
How to finish piece of wood for shelf.
To draw decorative, wavy lines in frosting
To wrap asparagus in bacon.
To quickly thaw frozen salmon,
How can you keep plastic bags organized?
The install baseboards to a wall in your home,
Shine silver jewlery without commercial cleaners.
how do you make strawberry milk?
How to make Kiwi Tarts at home.
To insulate wood from the sand in a desktop zen meditation garden.
How to color cut out blind panels.
Which is the best side to push a broken down car?
To grow beans in a bag
Preserve food for camping.
get rid of a ground bee's nest
how to sanitize your washing machine
Cure the hiccups.
How can I open a wine bottle without an opener?
napkins
Sanitize kitchen rags.
How can you keep from getting paint around the rim of your paint can while you are painting?
To mix eggs, coconut oil, vanilla, and ricotta cheese
How do you play tennis in Wii Sports?
To cut grooves into a wooden board.
How to Wear Bootcut Jeans
How to get rid of lice.
Make shoes waterproof.
To clean a DVD.
How to dye yarn.
To clean acorn nuts
To attach a card to the lid of the brownie batter in a jar
how to make coconut-raisin oatmeal
how to make lemon-herb rice
What rule should I live by, if I go to a casino?
To get a letter to someone as quickly as possible,
To make berries stay fresh longer in the refrigerator.
To remove curd from a liquid mixture, you can
how to remove gel nails?
how do you clapback during an argument?
garages
How did Amazon get its name?
Remove sand from feet after beach trip.
How do you make unique shapes with a 3d paper snowflake?
How can I communicate with my kid before they learn to speak?
How to make Chocolate Banana Tart at home.
Dust off small crevices.
How can I make a throw rug more comfortable?
How To care for your teeth
To boost alertness and energy, you should take a nap for
How to easily clean out a gutter?
How do I make art on a used CD?
How to tell if your clothes are dirty.
to make toilet paper last longer
Pan for gold and find some.
How to make a fun vertical bookshelf?
How do I locate Eridanus  constellation
How to patch a hole in a shirt?
To boil water in a saucepan,
To keep pizza warm when driving the pizza home,
Reflect photography light.
How to make a banana split.
what goes in a burrito in a jar?
How to remove odors from upholstery.
How do you make homemade popsicles from koolaid?
How can I get this pimple to go away?
Slow a bunch of bananas from ripening to quickly.
clean old yellowed toys
air humidifier
A cheap way to cool down your laptop
how do you look at the world clock on the alarm app on iphone?
To keep a straw from rising out of your can of soda,
How can I get clearer pictures on my phone when the pictures seem blurry?
How can I commute faster to the gym
What will Miracle Berry Foam do to your tastes?
how to make toast that isn't dry
whisk
Packing for a move
How to restart an android phone
To help your child stop using a pacifier,
How to access the unlock screen on an Android phone
How to make quick and easy pizza at home.
To close a sliding door.
To clean rust from a stainless steel sink,
What do you need to construct a miniature BBQ grill?
What do I need to make dulce de leche in an instant pot?
How do you safely paint your face?
magazine
To make a diy lumbar support pillow
to empty the dirt out of your dirt devil
How to form a teepee fire.
Avoid buying wrong fit shoes.
How to construct your brownies?
How do I mix in buttermilk when making chocolate bread?
Trick kids into eating oatmeal.
How to make denim shorts from old jeans?
To make a splash guard when using a hand mixer.
edge of table
To prepare a baking pan for bacon marshmallows.
What can I use to heat my blade to 1200°F so it will harden the steel ?
To cover edible flowers with egg white evenly.
Cut losses from a possible broken vending machine.
How do you freshen a musty closet?
How can I repair a hole in my air mattress?
How do you keep the car between the lines on the road?
baking sheet
How can I make a wooden board flat?
Add gloss to frosting.
pot
Protect garden from upcoming freezing temperature.
How to quickly chill a beer?
Make a marker in your garage to know when to stop backing up
how do you prove something?
One wishes to make a Spring-themed card.
How can you wrap a log of meat with bacon?
How to organize a suitcase.
how do you move something?
How to give your bathroom a natural flowery smell?
To make a water resistant handle for a knife, you can
chopsticks
Make slow garden watering tool.
How to make cut-off jean shorts
How do you cut an apple?
How do you clean a dishwasher?
phone
How to stop someone from stealing your pen.
Clean toaster oven.
To test if milk is too warm for a baby,
How can I make two pieces of wood stick without using nails or screws?
finger
tv tray
how do you surround someone?
How can I preserve and organize frozen bags of food in the freezer?
How can I dry citrus salt?
How do you make flatbread on a campfire?
To mix butter with flour and baking powder, you can
to blow a bubble
How to prevent eggs from turning watery after whisking?
How to make wood not look like wood after production.
What type of container can I use to carry embers to start another fire ?
How to ensure a knife sheath is cut to the right size for the knife?
hats
stool
supernova
Make a kids lunch kabob.
How to remove pet hair from upholstered furniture.
How do I adjust my car mirrors?
To make riding a bike easier for first-timers,
pen tip
To install a program on your computer.
Make picture holder.
how do you quarantine something?
How to easily capture the shape of a human eye on a drawing?
When making a modular origami swan what materials are needed?
Polish sink and bath fixtures without special cleaning products.
How do you prepare a jar to pour melted wax into it in order to make a candle?
How to clean a garbage disposal the natural way.
To cut expenses from your budget,
how to keep cocktails from being watered down
To make gluten free pancakes
To soften a spring roll, you can
Measuring a cup of sugar.
how do you set of the SOS alert on an iphone?
how to make nut clusters
How do I light a candle that has a short wick?
dents
To carry groceries into the house easily.
Keep rug from sliding.
Use alternative ziploc bags.
How to strength train
glasses
To keep pieces together while the epoxy dries.
Make paper food tray.
Does your room smell?
Don't offend a Japanese chef.
how to seal pastries
folding
how can i make a slushie at home?
how do you stop bleeding?
To make wood softer and easier to compress, you can
How do you make sugar water to feed honeybees in the fall?
To wear the Iron Man Arc Reactor around your chest.
To clean the lens of your camera,
coat hanger
How to easily thread a needle?
To make a cover to protect led's while allowing them to shine through, you can
underwear
repel flies
Make a ring toss game for the carnival.
To help your child feel less afraid when they're going to sleep,
Creating a comfortable sleep environment
bobby pin
How to take the sheet off the bed
How do you make an ice pack?
How do I know when my beaten egg whites are ready to use for a sweet vanilla souffle?
To cut pieces of sheet plastic thinly.
To filter your tap water,
How to make a chain from construction paper.
How to lower the temperature on an air conditioner.
How to make Toffee-Tastic Girl Scout cookie Vanilla Ice cream at home.
How to greet someone in German?
To cut the back off of a bullet, you can
Help straggly petunias to grow new lush flowers.
How do I attach a subfloor to a vapor barrier when making a sunroom addition for a house?
Keep your knife edges sharp in a drawer.
How to remove skin from a pepper?
What size wood pieces will I need to make an Ipod stand?
To create a flower pot for flower pot necklace.
To trim down the tombstone milano cookie for the graveyard brownies
Enhance nutrition value of pesto.
bat
when do you grate citrus peel?
Cut the wood for the trusses for the bridge
juice a cucumber without a juicer
Remove scuffs from sneakers.
How can I figure out if something is economical?
how do you use a heating blanket?
how to make a wedge salad
how do you walk in heels?
To easily hold a nail down when hammering it and avoid injuring a finger,
To finish off the fondant roses
How to unclog a toilet.
How can you get rid of a bad mood or negative thoughts?
To prevent breathing in dust when cutting steel, you can
To make a pan easier to clean after baking
how to remove price stickers
what is the best oil for frying?
how ot make meatballs
Where can I buy cigarettes
Make an arm sling.
How can you break a pot to make a flower pot garden?
Hang extra hangers together.
How do you protect yourself when you craft leather armor?
To remove excess grease and oil from patties once you've cooked them
how to make nail polish last longer
How to un-mute a television using the remote
How can I save my walls from my kids rolling stroller?
extend the shelf life of simple syrup
how do you strike a stage?
How do I locate the Chameleon constellation
How do I dip the balloons in chocolate to make balloon dipped chocolate bowls?
To prevent dripping before soldering vertical joints in plumbing pipe.
pumice
To glue pieces of cardboard together, you can
Where can I take my dog to play
How to decide what you need to organize.
Make gift tags.
to deconstruct an old pair of underwear.
how to run faster
liquid
To save money on your utility bill.
How do I remove wrinkles from cotton when sewing?
rubber band
cotton ball
How do you fill an ice tray?
What is the safest way to enter a shower to get clean?
One wants very runny eggs.
Hot air balloons
credit card
To get a drawer pull for a project, you can
How can I clean the grill of a fan?
How do you store hard boiled eggs in the refrigerator?
To make purple paint
How can I clean the white rubber on the bottom of my shoe.
What type of materials would be needed in a home made, out door tool kit to treat injuries?
To chill dough after preparing it, you can
To create a realistic backdrop for a wall aquarium.
To cut hexagon pieces for decoration.
To sew gortex to fabric,
blanch almonds
how do you delete something on a laptop?
Create a collection of leaves.
To sift flour and salt together evenly for cinnamon bread
Care for a tongue burn
Remove ink stain from polo pocket.
How do you accurately measure dry ingredients with measuring spoons?
magnet
How to clean a toothbrush which is dirty to sanitize it?
DIY your own lip balm.
how do you brainstorm something?
Add label area to mason jar lids.
how do you use dial up internet on a laptop?
What should I wear for the fall season
How can I clean the top of a fan?
To spray paint a masked print.
How to change a baby's diaper.
How to make a bed frame?
To prevent your laptop from a sudden rainstorm outside,
To make black colored concrete.
How can I paint a design on my fingernails?
How do I cut a pineapple
hat
how do you mend a wound?
How to make a watermelon shake.
penny
To make Spinach Mashed Potato Latkes,
One wants the cider to be sour.
To keep your child's heart healthy,
Make a phone stand for your smart phone.
Add extra storage for garage tools.
How to core an apple easily?
Where can I find a tigers
how do you go sky diving?
How to paint the toe of a boot
How do plants clean air
To harden melted cocoa butter, you can
Iron both sides of clothing.
What's an easy way or two to clean my dog?
machete
To turn an Oreo into an ice cream sandwich,
What adhesive metal should you use when soldering glass?
How do I remove unwanted facial hair?
wet cloth
How can you keep a toilet in a public place from auto flushing while you are using it?
wet wipes
How to pay a bill that comes in late?
How do I protect  from the rain  a camp  fire in a grill/fire ring combo?
How to make purple icing
Make a flower stamp.
To score a bogey in a hole of golf,
How do I find new videos on Youtube
how to patch a swimming pool liner underwater
How can I make my own picture frame message board?
What kind of saw can you use to make curved cuts in wood?
how do you bake a pizza?
how do you use a stapler?
Eliminate gunk from garden shovel.
DIY seed starters
Give kids a temporary tattoo with contact info.
rubber stamp
To seal plastic tubing inside of a plastic lid, you can
Make a shoe holder in your closet.
Solve math problems without pen and paper.
Use old potatoes to make more.
One seeks to make a space-efficient piece of furniture for a child.
how to add more flavor to a broth?
How to make Coke slurpees at home.
To seal a pipe that has sprung a leak in it,
odor absorber for the refigerator
To prevent water from growing bacteria, you can
How do I make the pudding for a strawberry napoleon?
To top the pizza bread with sauce
How can I dry my broccoli before cooking it?
Where to keep honey after opening
What can I do to prevent grease fires from happening while I am cooking?
What are the ingredients for a western omelette?
Remove grease dust from stove hood.
To make tights easier to put on,
To start a fire,
Securing and reinforcing the the joints.
Painting the helmit
How do I water the plants?
how do you give someone permission for something?
How to make Mint Oreo Chocolate cookie Ice cream at home.
slingshot
soap
How do I send an SOS signal from a distant location?
How can I make pretty placemats from paper?
where is the Scorpius constellation located
Find the right foundation color.
How to check banana bread to see if the bake is done.
To separate the juice from bacon slurry, you can
To saute onions, you can
I don't have space for a dishrack, what can I use?
Easily scrape paint off of a brush with one quick modification to the can.
To wash a plate
how to make toasted garlic and sage rice
How can I turn on my game console
Find huge deals on craigslist.
how do you provide something?
Practicing to play music
To clean strawberries, you can
feed Koi fish using your hand
how do i color my hair?
how to remove the avocado pit
sword
how do you park a car?
Why a homemade lactic acid face mask is effective
Hold cake pops.
How to get rid of roaches in the house.
Kitchen
how to make a corned beef with horseradish slaw sandwich
To beat butter until creamy for the jello cookies
how to make classic stuffing
To stop stray light bouncing inside wooded pinhole camera and ruining photos.
When embroidering, to make the center of a flower
How can you carry a gallon of milk if your hands are full?
Keep dresser drawers clean.
how to open a jar of peanut butter.
How do I add the pecan mixture in the pan when making creamy chocolate toffee torte?
Making DIY wet wipes.
how to upgrade linoleum floor without tearing it out?
cut a dragonfruit
Make a Duct Tape Ball
To feel accomplished
the best way to keep strawberries for winter baking?
Avoid falling asleep during long drives.
How can I make my own Gatorade at home?
Insert multiple keys on key ring.
How to Make Deviled Eggs
How do I wash my clothes
How to water plant.
how do you wear a bandana?
To make apple pie filling sweeter.
To prevent candy from sticking to aluminum foil while baking, you can
how do you sever a tie?
To make a musical performance seem more intimate,
make easy pizza
sock
loofah
To open a jump ring to make chainmail.
To cut the trucks of roller skates in half.
To connect two pieces of wire
How to Make Pineapple Upside Down Cake Pudding Shots
What should you do to stop the pain after a Jelly Fish stings you?
how do you use an etch a sketch?
One seeks to have carbs for breakfast.
How to milk a cow.
To keep a burn from blistering
what to do with taco seasoning
How can I make homemade Ice packs for injuries at home?
How many eggs do I need to make pancakes?
To make icing for carrot cake.
How can I easily remove waterproof face makeup?
How do you get rid of cockroaches?
painting
To cook bacon in a paper bag.
To have immediate service during emergencies,
What can I use on the edge of my paddle board to waterproof it ?
How do you hook a hose up to a water outlet?
To create a strawberry and mango puree, you can
table
What happens after I place the lemon juice in the syrup when making mooncakes?
Remove grease from pans.
To combine eggs in a bowl, you can
Prevent ants from gathering on sidewalks.
To eat an orange,
How do you splice wire together?
ice cube tray
How to protect a framed paper drawing from dust?
How can you prevent a bug bite from itching?
How to add LED lights to a christmas tree costume.
Feed 4 people for $5.
how do you drive when it's raining
paperweight
How can you steady meat skewers so they don't keep rolling over?
tumbler
Cooking the pancakes
how do you cure a cold?
Freshen up kitchen odor.
How do I make sure that the melamine doesn't swell up with moisture when making a concrete countertop mold?
To remove all the hair from a barbie doll.
make a box of jello
How To Make Cheesy Ground Beef Bell Peppers
how to make a mulled red wine
To keep candles from melting onto an ice cream cake,
How to trim white margin from map printout.
DIY sandbox.
Scrub body without a loofah.
How can I spice up the interior of old drawers?
How do you finish the base for your stollet lamp?
To safely lift a cat off the ground,
How to construct the bottom of your DIY bed bar?
To clean up the edges of a wooden project, you can
how to identify orions belt
fork
To calm a crying baby,
bag
How can you take a quick detox spa like bath at home?
How to install the mailbox.
how to use a plunger
Other then a pot, what else can you use to make blueberry lavender butter?
How to test a 9 volt battery?
Detect dampness in bed.
To slice a lemon in half,
fingernail
If you are going to use balloons in cooking, you should
How do I learn how to knit
How to apply cloth to panel.
How to make a dress form
To turn foam egg carton into an electronic components storage box.
How do you make a backdrop stickhole for photography?
how do you make anti depressants work?
eat grapefruit
metal armor
To dry out a powder before working with it further, you can
vat
To cool down your bedroom without turning on the air conditioner,
how do you meddle about something?
How to ozonate your drinking water?
To save bacon grease,
how do you clean water?
When making homemade spring rolls what kind of wrapper should I roll them in?
how do I keep a cut avocado from browning?
To bake a ball of clay, you can
make homemade frozen blueberry yogurt
Remove pet hair from coffee table.
how do you make one letter capital using the keyboard?
How to easily cut paper without a scissors?
How to find a word quickly in a dictionary or other alphabetized index.
To allow the cookie butter to soften to eat after storing
head
Glue together cards with cutout centers.
how to strip kale leaves from stems
how do you show emotion?
To allow dough to proof, you can
To make your room smell fresher in minutes,
How to Unclog a Sink
To prevent meat from moving when flipping skewers of meat,
How to switch a Nintendo switch.
How can I remove pet hair from furniture?
machete
To remove the backing from a strip of EL ribbon without destroying the electrical tracks.
Car making weird but only intermittently?
How do I prevent damage to my electronics in an area with frequent outages?
How to get water from a tap?
How to split your log?
To make a picture with live cactus plants,
To ensure your internet privacy.
how do you strangle someone?
How can I tighten puffy eyes?
Steps to make electricity from fire.
hose
Remove rust from garden tools.
Use an alternative for kitchen twine.
Hanging a bird feeder from a ground hook and filling it.
To hide the bolts used to place the car seat in the car with upholstery padding.
How can you make cheap I.D. tags for trees or plants outdoors?
To improve the texture of reheated leftover food,
How can I remove old polish from shoes?
how to make your water boil faster.
tongs
Decorate a wooden shelf
To safely hook up a new item to a house's natural gas.
how to make caesar corn
To save time that you have to spend grocery shopping,
How can I unstick and find the end of a large roll of packing tape?
How do I hold down some loose papers on my desk?
To garnish home made salsa.
What can be turned into virtually free charcoal pencils in a fire?
how do you cover up a window so people can't see in?
To use stale tortilla chips.
slingshot
How do I start a workout routine
How do I cut the details of the wood frame ?
how do you use your hands to type on a laptop?
Prevent smudges on stainless steel dishwasher.
Reduce size of cork for wine bottle.
how to sharpen a knife quickly
To get a dog to take his pills.
To cut slices of banana, you can
Tenderize raw meat.
how do you use the keyboard buttons on a laptop?
how to keep black fabrics black
Make mashed sweet potatoes.
how do you crack your knuckles?
To easily whiten and clean window blinds perfectly,
wok
How can I find studs inside a finished wall in my home?
How Can You Mark Out the Size Hole You Need for a Sunken Trampoline?
paper clip
How to make a mud mask for face.
To have a successful lemonade stand.
To efficiently fit a bath mat into a bathroom when there is an air vent in the way,
To rinse raw chicken,
To help make a pair of jeans look more fresh,
To win a relay race,
How to stay awake
key
How can I keep a braid from coming undone?
how do you wear lotion?
How do I remove tarnish from copper?
bobby pin
how do you get a cart at walmart?
ribbon
Where do you commonly hide money?
How to spruce up old furniture.
To put a book to use when you no longer need it.
how do I make coconut balls?
cook asparagus with lemon
tie
To remove rust from drill bits
To the move the typing cursor left or right on an iPhone,
How do I tomato puree with fresh tomatoes ?
Roast garlic in the oven
shoes
To pop a dent out of a fender,
Plant a tree in your yard.
how to slow banana ripening
How to make paper mache.
how do you sink something?
Make a hanging terrarium.
How can I make matted artificial grass look more lifelike?
To stop a mosquito bite from itching,
How do I prepare Chinese rice
how to take quick screenshots
To make concrete forms for a shed foundation end at an even height.
How to wind a ball of yarn with your hand.
book
How can I amplify the speaker on my smartphone?
Improve quality of sleep.
how to identify venemous snake in US
How to shave your feet
What ingredients are used to make a simple royal icing?
Dust the lamp shades quickly.
jug
how to fold in egg whites
To make a pattern out of a thin plastic.
To connect the ears of a teddy bear crochet hat to the hat.
Remove rust from old metal fixtures.
Where can I buy mirrors
What should you do to prepare a glass window for frosting?
How to save money on small electronics batteries using an A 23, 12 V battery from Walmart.
How to make a wooden surface smooth?
board
board
mattress topper
To trim unsightly leaves from a flower, you can
to show disapproval?
how do you sort books?
Peel Banana Bottoms Up
To make modelling peanut butter
Gift ideas for teenage boys.
How to gain the trust and confidence of the voters in an election?
whisk
How to make candy cane, chocolate, popcorn crunch at home
What is the best way to slice an apple?
how do you connect to a wifi network on your phone?
What material tires would make driving more efficient?
how to sanitize baby bottles
how do you shuffle play a playlist on spotify?
How do I blind bake the pie crust when making mini pies?
Make a memo board.
how to add flavor to bland broths and stocks?
To easily remove the paper label from glass bottles, you can
How can I keep flowers alive until they are put in a vase of water?
How do I get rid of inner thigh fat?
How can you freshen oil you have cooked in before?
The 3 items you will need to remove gum from clothing.
To make an emergency candle out of cheese
To prevent something from moving while drilling it, you can
How to cut log in half.
How do i thread a needle?
How can you cut out the desired shape for the eyes to use for the bookmark?
How to lock a bathroom door.
ice rinks
How to boil water.
How can I make cottage cheese and sour cream last longer?
How to rinse off a pork cure?
how to find nutrition facts on food?
scissors
To put batter onto a basking sheet.
How can I open a sealed envelope without ripping it?
give the illusion of space in a small room
how do you search something on google?
how to clean large windows
How do you dry off a hot dog you boiled?
How do you close a stretched key ring?
rags
If you don't own an ironing board
get finger prints off gun
How do you cut out the eyes for a mask?
Making a Solar Dry Box
To prevent bread from burning to the pan when you bake it, you can
How do you set up an aquarium for Wrestling Halfbeaks?
How can I get every last bit of Nutella out a jar?
To take carry on luggage on an airplane,
Remove mirror stains.
pot
How can I use a hairdryer to dry the dye on a piece of leather I dyed?
How can you more effectively quit smoking?
Make finished wood look shiny.
What is an easy way to remove stuck on food from a skillet?
How can you sign it to a different account on the laptop?
cup
To prepare the wooden panels from a wooden pallet to be used in making a table.
hoe
how do you use find my friends?
To cut material for making a bracelet from a soda bottle.
sock
To boil water more quickly on the stove top,
In order to put shingles on a roof,
How to clean a blender.
How to easily cut up a watermelon.
fix burnt toast
To turn spring roll wrappers black, you can
To score a run in a baseball game,
To make dough less dry and crumbly.
Mount ladder bookshelf.
To cook a cake in a mug in the microwave, you can
how do you draw a triangle?
To get rid of some of the fat and starch from a package ramen noodles.
To play Sonic 3 & Knuckles on Sega Genesis.
Deter bird poop.
To cut a length of rope when making a survival bracelet,
Keep mosquitoes away.
How to make chocolate milk.
Grow your own succulents.
Add a basket to a bicycle.
bat
How can I make wood filler?
To get a suntanned look without damaging your skin,
Easy way to join two PVC materials together.
Where can I buy snacks
How to remove lipstick stains from clothes.
camera
To attach a frame around a premade table top.
How to make sweet fish sauce for spring rolls.
comb
score a nail
To cut the brownies to resemble legos
how to make a bloody bull
To bake bread, you can
How can I see the Hercules constellation
How to ensure minimal damage to life while driving in a car in case of an accident?
To brute force a combination lock.
How do you transition a child from stroller to walking?
how to do a pedicure
How to pave a kitchen slab?
To keep eggs on hand without them getting spoiled.
how to repel flies from your porch
how do you make chicken wings?
To mine gold with a pickaxe
How do I pack jewelry into a suitcase?
pen
How do you break a window?
To make a headlight less cloudy, you can
Clean second story windows
blanket
how do you plant something?
To fix a wobbly bolted table leg.
how do you call someone from your phone?
To light your charcoal grill without lighter fluid
How do you accurately measure a liquid in a glass measuring cup?
chef
Clean up broken glass.
How do I chill the doug for croissants once it has risen?
To keep soy margarine from burning while sauteing.
When making macarons, what is the best way to put the batter on the baking tray?
how do you stop a cycle?
To get the fresher tasting beverages in a grocery store,
How To Make a Garlic Aioli
how do you get on a horse?
To make greensand for making a casting mold.
Fishing at the creek in the woods.
How to made shield edges smooth.
To thicken up a macaroni and cheese recipe,
How do you stop cranberry fruitworm from spreading once they have infested your cranberry plant?
Changing the bit on an adjustable screwdriver.
Reduce sugar craving.
What can I use to cook Naan bread if I don't have a clay oven?
Take a nap without bag getting stolen.
The main material in an Autumn glow.
How can I cool my Pumpkin Pie for serving faster?
razor
shoe
Salt
Change the air filter in your vehicle.
To store the cranberry cookie dough roll in the freezer for more than 2 days
how to remove fabric marker marks on fabric
Use alternate to butter when making toast.
How can I waterproof the inside of a homemade waterskin canteen?
How do you store washed and ironed fabric before use?
Prevent scratches on floor.
To rinse spare ribs to begin using them for a recipe, you can
How secure your homemade bar to your wall?
shot glass
What way can you remove a screw that is rounded out?
How do you harvest baneberries?
To avoid having any financial debts,
how do you walk forward?
What can I use to play music on
machete
To make sure your voice is heard during election season,
Prevent hair dye stains.
To get my milk to last, while I am on vacation.
To flip the pancake over quickly to cook both sides.
metal bucket
How to clean dishes in dishwasher.
screw
To file paperwork alphabetically,
How to plant Roses so they grow well?
Make cookies without oven.
how to apply a hair mask
How do you plump a pillow?
Polish silver teapot.
Make luggage easier to identify.
paint the ceiling without dripping paint on the floor
how do you dispose of sanitary napkins?
What do I need to add to my pasta to make it spicier after making it?
To add petals to the fondant rose
how do you center a picture?
Treat dry toenail cuticles.
How to find a location for a water container garden.
how do you mow the lawn?
To hold fabric together while you sew it, you can
What are the steps to make a fruit fly trap?
To sew pieces of socks together.
how far in advanced should I slice cake?
To keep track of your luggage more easily,
What do I need to make green bean casserole?
how to make apple-bacon toast
How to know if a person is a stalker?
To eat a cupcake without eating all of the frosting first,
Should you apply a finish to the wood after sanding?
How to Add Brine to Jar to Make Easy Fermented Garlic
stockings
Use comforting noise to fall asleep.
how do you light up a christmas tree?
Add color to a new candle.
To open a letter neatly without ruining the envelope,
What can I grow plants in?
How To Make Banana Bread from Scratch
What tool to use to drizzle chocolate?
how do you age bananas?
how do you see how far you've gotten on your goal on mturk?
To help learn random new trivia facts without much work,
Homemade deodorant
how to make salmon rissoles
Preparing to Study
How do you smooth out wood for making barn doors?
How to make Chocolate covered Peanuts Fantasy Fudge
rolling pin
Iron clothes without iron.
To prevent a pencil from rolling off of a desk,
To copy and paste a file.
To spread pizza sauce over dough,
What can I use to keep some documents attached together?
tree
How do I trace the pattern on the piece of leather ?
How can you extend freshness in cut flowers?
How to fill rough surfaces in work pieces.
How to rinse off a toothbrush
How do you make deviled eggs?
How to sew a tuck.
how do you get your adult teeth?
How to dissuade trick or treaters from coming to your place.
Increase warm air in house.
How to Take Care of Nursing Cats
how do you fold a paper?
To open a beer bottle with a watch,
How do you add salt to a bowl of eggs and cheese?
cellophane
How often should I water my apple tree?
table leg
pine shavings
To travel safely with a razor.
Decorate a mini top hat with feathers for Mardi Gras.
How to pre-heat oven for cookies.
To save money on seeing a movie in the theaters,
how to prep a lot of onions
To complete a contract,
To hang a magnet on a wall, you can
how to make roasted garlic blt toast
How do you prep your glass to make a custom beer mug?
How to pot a plant.
Safely clean thin vase.
What step should you take prior to applying dry rub to raw chicken?
To close windows tabs on a computer.
Make a toy car holder.
What kind of noodles can I put in a witches brew noodle soup?
pins
blanch spinach
To combine butter with dough, you can
To bring egg whites to room temperature
how do you wear blush?
Add citrus flavor to tea.
To clean the garbage disposal.
How do you make chocolate ganache for macarons?
Display holiday cards.
Keep rocks and twigs out of shoes during hike.
To gussy up a peanut butter sandwich for someone that doesn't like jelly,
how to unscratch your plates
To reupholster a dining room chair,
Treat sore throat.
How to make Strawberry Newton chocolate Ice cream at home.
Organize unused cables.
making the handles
To lubricate scissors so they cut more easily.
How to Make an Easy Omelet
How can I get internet type info on my phone if I don't have internet on the phone?
how do you consume soup?
How to draw a bubble bath
How can I make a thread ball?
To add support to cardboard display stand.
To eliminate cigarette smoke odors,
To attach wood and fill in gaps at the same time.
How do you kill flies?
slicer
To break an egg,
gloves
Measure wall for mounting.
How can I glue moss inside of a picture frame?
What tools will I need for cooking?
Prevent remotes from getting lost.
To remove stubborn price stickers and labels from containers
How to properly wash and dry vegetables.
To transfer a downloaded movie onto a dvd disk.
What supplies are needed to make a wall hanging from matchboxes?
microwave
Repair dull scissors.
how ot make pizza sauce
To make Mario Bros coins to lay around your room,
blender
Save some hassle and mess by prepping your pancake mix at home
how do you send a message to someone on instagram?
mold
What should you do if bitten by a Rattlesnake?
how do you find the contact us link on mturk?
Prevent odors in gym bag.
To make crunchy taco shells
To save overripe bananas.
watering can
To keep cats from taking off the top of the water filter
easily shred cheese without much of a mess
What do you do after you're satisfied with the length of the helix paracord key fob?
Prevent ice on car mirrors.
How can I insure my phone will find its way back to me if I lose it?
Make a cake pop stand.
sticks
how do you get rid of the tail on a jalapeno pepper?
maek curried rice
mirror
Help someone who is sick to feel better.
How to make Chocolate Bacon Fantasy fudge at home.
how do you tighten the hood on a hoodie?
Make sweets for the birthday party.
To increase the citrus flavor of the pork in pork carnitas while it is in the oven
How to pick a vessel to go crabbing in.
How to grip a boomerang
To make a kite,
how do you win at chess?
To scrape cream cheese out of a strainer,
To remove gum easily from clothing,
Create a photo storage box.
smothering
How do you identify a ripe persimmon by sight?
To cover up wood you don't want painted when painting the rest of it.
How do you remove a splinter?
bottle opener
What can you do to make cardboard water resistant?
To grill vegetables using wooden skewers safely.
To attach pieces of metal together for can crusher.
How can I fill a bucket or large pot in a small sink?
water
how do you carry coffee around?
Make a small vase.
For perfectly manicured nails
How can you make an old tire look like new?
To protect your eyes when using a saw, you should
how do you cuff someone?
how to ensure your seam allowances are the right size?
how to improve jigsaw cuts
How to make stands for car canopy.
make an indoor slide for the kids
to eliminate nasty smells from your shoes.
To make the best choice on where to vacation,
How many rope strands can be made from a plastic bottle?
How do you remove permanent marker from wood furniture?
Ripen bananas quickly.
How can you keep a brass ring from turning your finger green?
cut an avacado
To make a ghost costume for Halloween,
How do you remove the RAM sticks from a motherboard?
How to cut a piece of netting with scissors.
Prevent ads when playing smartphone games.
How do I size the wooden beer koozie?
how to add flavor to cookies
How to prepare seashells you have collected on the beach for use in crafting projects?
One seeks to have their subject printed as a shadow.
meditation
mop
Make a quick fire starter.
Making a Tanto Knife From Lawn Mower Blade.
How do I make regular blue jeans work for a Batman costume?
How to Enjoy Being Single
how do you resurface something?
How do you clean a stain off of a shirt?
To make a rubber band ball,
how do you change the color of your eyes?
Knock out a fish before cleaning.
Remove gray tint from white clothes.
How can I get a long handled match to light candles (Or anything) when I don't have one at home?
To pass a drug test after having smoked pot.
Learn how to cut felt with a template.
Avoid clumps in pepper shaker.
To clean a laptop without getting it too wet,
To trace a circle on a piece of paper, you can
How to get rid of static in my hair
When selecting the location a vegetable garden what should you take into consideration?
Protect neck from sun.
One seeks to look like a theater performer.
How do you paint a stencil?
To make a sponge last longer by killing the germs in it.
To become a manager of a business,
How to make Great Sweet Potatoes in your microwave oven.
where is the constellaiton Pixys located
How can I protect floors from chair legs?
What can I use for a travel litter box?
To make a hamburger,
Peel an hard boiled egg
how to easily clean your sponges?
Prevent dirt from grounding into sofa fibers.
To make pulled pork.
How can I drain browned beef?
mop
To remove blood stains from fabric.
how do you kiss someone?
how to clean copper sinks
international memos
how to fake a window shadow?
how do you open a file cabinet?
To flush a toliet.
Industrial weight scales
What supplies are needed to make an LED American Flag?
How can I keep my pizza leftover from getting too chewy when microwaving?
how ot make soap
how do you play sardines?
how do you exact something?
Preheat an oven to 315 degrees
how to make ham banh mi sandwich
To cut a 2-liter plastic soda bottle with scissors.
How can you pry a lid open?
how to make dirty rice
To open the foil package of cream cheese,
How do you find the angle of rotational symmetry?
To protect much-used or oft-used pages in a reference book.
paint
how do you use a ladder?
how to winterize windows
chisel
To crimp down the edges of a baked pastry, you can
To get rid of oily face.
To give a satisfying texture to a finished product, you can
How do you make a mason jar night light?
How do I make oreo balls?
Prevent bandages from getting wet.
How do you keep your room organized?
How can I eliminate digital clutter?
What do I use to bake my apple roses in the oven?
how ot make baby powder
How can you make a suncatcher?
How can I flatten ties so they are easier to work with?
make tropical smoothie
How do I prepare the eggs for making an oatmeal pie?
hat
How can I find my dad's location
To easily remove bags from a trash can.
Tie off wire jewlery after placing a design.
To make a calzone taste better
how do you cook bacon?
how to make oyster stuffing
To hang single use coffee capsules as a mini hanging planter.
How can I get my shoelaces to stay cleaner?
How do you substitute milk when making a smoothie?
What's the largest size of turkey I can deep fry?
How can I quickly dry wet dishware or containers?
how do you calculate square feet?
Make bacon pancakes.
One seeks to make a decorative coconut bowl.
To cut a square out of a plastic bucket, you can
how to stuff bell peppers
internet
tarp
How do you power a tv remote?
paintbrush
To make a strawberry smoothie.
Make flowers last longer.
Spread cold or hard butter easily.
how do you make detox tea?
To attach wooden panels to a frame, you can
Remove the metal solder point on the bottom of the bulb
Loosen stuck drawers.
The correct way to grip a hammer
To prevent distractions while trying to work,
How to clean contact lenses?
To make mini pies out of one big pie.
To use a metal material for bike tire grips that doesn't require a layer to protect the inner tube from puncturing.
how do you charge the new airpods?
paper towel
To fix squares of cardboard together
How do I advance my carerr
What to use to pluck eyebrows at home?
Scrub rough stains on bathroom tile.
To make cheese covered egg in a hole toast.
How to make a trash bin into a lamp?
One seeks to have an alternative Christmas.
Sharpen dull scissors.
axe
How do you set up a slideshow picture frame?
To keep your towels more organized.
One wants to decorate their child's room with Star Wars gear.
to preserve an insect for a science project
To get the built up residue off your shower head
A good spray paint to use.
How do you stop a toothache fast?
pestle
Prepare an image to make a bottle cap pin.
How do you make sure the lid on a newly canned jar of homemade jam is sealed properly?
What is the best type of oil to use to make Churros?
What can I use for piping without a pastry piping bag?
How to Gain Muscle Fast
Remove sap from gardening tool.
To make cherry flavored hard candies.
To get stains out of your white sheets when you do the laundry.
Fill the PVC Pipe With Sand
Stretch a spot in snug shoes.
What should you add to your reusable baby wipes besides water?
To color leather
stick
What is good to use as a wood finish on wood?
rope
To obtain a nice even layer of frosting on the monkey cupcake
How to Make a Basic Cranberry Barbecue Sauce
How to wash the dishes?
how do you do a reverse layup?
Trouble sleeping.
how to make mustard, herb and spice seasoning.
How do you poke holes in polymer clay beads before they're baked?
Give plants a calcium bath.
To cut multiple pieces for an end table from a single piece of wood.
How to flatten dough for pie crust.
how do you make a snowman?
How do I bring the coconut milk to a boil when making vanilla ice cream?
To make bubbles that won't break easily.
reading glasses
bulldozer
How to clean computer screen.
How do you break a hole in an old floor?
To dust a large piece of furniture.
how do you walk down the aisle if you're a bride?
ladder
To draw out moisture from grated zucchini
What materials do I need to draw on fabric with yarn?
To roll a burrito.
How to cross the street
blankets
I have moths in my house and need an organic solution.
How high do the walls need to be?
Remove extra glue from plastic
How does one get a piece of clothing to dry really quickly with a dryer.
To sleep a full night after having a lot of alcohol,
jug
How do you grow a fern in a pot?
cheese cloth
foam block
To not cry while cutting up onions,
How to make instant noodles
how do you check a requesters ratings on mturk?
To connect two modular together for the hanging lamp shade
how often should I wash jeans
How do you juice baneberries with a strainer?
To lower the temperature in your automobile.
how to make a cure box for crafts with adhesives
How To Make Homemade Twinkies
How to sit down.
How do I go canoeing
vase
How do you identify when to take a stem cutting from a dogwood plant?
television
how to get cheap textbooks
Where can I get a tattoo
plate
How to shave the legs.
To prevent sound from escaping from speakers when listening to music in public,
To reuse an old deck of card?
how to make grapefruit-ginger toast
To sweeten tea naturally,
When tying rolls of bread to form shapes as they bake,
To remove screws from a laptop
To attach planks into the gaps within a pallet, you can
Roll out toothpaste.
Thaw ground pork faster.
To get clear skin.
To get a tax return
To lock the door,
to make your shoes waterproof
To break a breakfast burrito,
stove top
How long do you have to walk to burn off 100 calories?
To be able to afford a home purchase,
q-tip
To keep food in refrigerator cold if the power goes out during a storm
Weave three strands of thin wire to make one thicker wire.
Make organic card holder.
felt
Eat noodles without fork or chop sticks.
Joining the legs to seat
How do you prepare vintage buttons for crafting and gluing?
To apply spray adhesive safely,
To make your own pencil holder.
How do you cook the onions to make pizza sauce?
Allow paint roller to absorb more paint.
How do you clean tennis shoes?
To apply white felt to a sweatshirt without seams for making a Totoro costume.
how do you talk on the phone?
How to run oven on self cleaning mode
To make creamier cocoa with powder mix,
Remember pen text.
Puppy proof home from toxins.
To start planting in your yard after prepping
spray paint
How can I tell if an egg has gone bad?
How can I test my fruit to see if it covered with wax or toxins?
How do you cut cheese when you don't have a knife?
nail file
Secure a basket to a bike frame.
To roast hazelnuts.
how to line dry sweaters
How do you entice dogs to eat dry food if they refuse to?
tack
hand wash dishes
To make potato chips crunchier when they get soft,
wooden spoon
3 ft of snow
How do you prevent body odor smell?
To keep water from boiling over inside of a pot,
how do you turn on an hp laptop?
To shine colored pencils,
How to Deal With Friends With Different Political Views
Avoid cold sores.
how do you put a hoodie on?
How to solidify candle.
To make an easy spaghetti holder,
How to plant a flower
To kill the weeds in your lawn,
How can I locate the constelaliton Lepus
plug
to find a way to serve oatmeal without cooking.
easily clean a microwave
How do you fertilize a plant?
To prepare a blackberry filling for galette.
To make maple-nut candies
rubber
Remove a bird from the house.
How do you crush garlic?
Avoid leaving food for spiders.
Child proof table corners.
How can you clean stains from a wooden desk?
How to perfectly cut the strap of a dress?
How to use AAA batteries in place of AAs?
how to start a riding mower
How do I hammer a nail in straight?
Cut many pieces of ribbon at once.
What does it mean to bake something?
cutting and organizing wires
How can I search for a specific phrase using Google?
When cooking meatballs in the oven, you should
How to mix styrofoam glue.
How to make a large serving of bacon at once?
Attaching the hat to the body
how to flash pasteurize eggs
How can I keep my tacos from breaking up when eating them?
Mix pieces of bread and tacky glue.
floor
How can a person attach two pieces of plywood together?
How do I sneak a water bottle into a sports stadium.
Cut a dead snake open from the anal vent
How to keep a compost heap healthy?
wrench
To easily remove crayon from a children's room wall,
basket
wire
How do I beat a game full through
How to add soy sauce to rice
How to water a tree
How to charge a mobile phone
To easily do cardio at home.
tub
To pickle an egg.
how to make an easy push block
television tray
Prevent side car mirrors from freezing.
How do I clean the bathrooms?
How to transfer shape of template to a piece of wood.
How do you plan to build a cabin?
pot
Melt one stick of butter.
Make a tape roll end holder
Absorb bad food smells in fridge.
Protection for the eyes in the workshop.
How to make a book end.
To velvet chicken for Chinese cooking.
To minimize slipping on wooden surfaces for the wooden plane.
How do you find the mean?
How to make a paper wet?
To polish off car or bicycle headlights
What supplies do you need to detail a car?
To affix a piece of paper to a piece of cloth so you can cut both at once, you can
What type of container should be used for a home made, outdoor, multi-purpose tool kit?
How do you prevent your teeth from getting stained?
Jamaican Rice
how do you make sure a kid stays seated in a shopping cart?
Clean children's toys.
How do you clean a flat screen tv?
How many people are required to push a car?
How to determine where a puncture is in a bicycle tire tube?
what to do with zucchini tops
To reuse wood scraps, you can
Make pizza.
How do you chop up watermelon?
Cut onions quickly for burgers.
To prevent your dog from digging his way out of your yard
To drain your laptop battery quickly,
To sew bicycle inner tube together to make a crow
how do you give someone a black eye?
to neatly hull a strawberry.
Extend the life of spices.
grater
How do you create straight caulking lines in your tub?
how to lie?
Make a metal trophy shine like new.
how do you open youtube on an iphone?
How can I keep my western style hat from falling off my head without a strap?
how do you save progress on an essay on word?
How do you cut a dog's nails?
eyes
To minimise the chance of burning your hands when lowering the turkey into the turkey fryer
how do you scissor something?
how to prepare a turkey for cooking
To loosen a rusty nut, bolt, or screw that won't budge.
Make slime with Jello
Restore shine on hardwood floor.
rattles
How can I keep my shoes more organized?
To prepare hazlenuts for a spread
Reduce amount of time cook steak.
To find the peak load or maximum wattage of your home
How to make Easy Lemon Peel Juice
To increase the pressure of the water coming from a water hose,
How to dye carnations different colors.
how to cut carpet as you are removing it
magic eraser
How can you keep your sandwich from home from getting soggy in a bag?
To make the melted cheese on a pizza crispier,
How can I protect my gutters from the ladder I use near or on them?
How to protect your cell phone from breaking.
stove
To change a screwdriver bit.
How do you slice an orange?
How to peel a lot of peaches
how do you dry a phone that has been submerged in water?
how do you clean something?
mail
How to Get a Boy to Stop Teasing You
Make egg free brownies.
pan lid
To attach a piece of paper to wood.
How do you organize the tools in a workshop?
aluminum foil
To connect two lengths of PVC pipe together, you can
To do a basic cross stitch
Soothe painful back.
how to easily cut cookie dough into squares?
To save time while getting ready in the morning if you have to shower,
After folding the cardboard into the correct shapes how are they fastened?
diamond drill
How should you remove a lightbulb?
What's your favorite desert?
To melt dark chocolate to dip pears into for coating.
To maintain a handstand,
Sooth insect bite.
How to clean mini blinds.
Add parachutes to action figure.
How To Protect Your Hands and Surfaces When Dying Fabric
Nylon
To eliminate suction when changing garbage bags
how to stain wood
Dry school notebook.
How to harden leather
How can I get the best use of my toothpaste?
how do you take the blame for something?
Make a mini Smores grill.
how to remove rust from a cast iron skillet
How do you make smores on a campfire?
To quickly locate a lost screw when it has fallen,
What can I do if I want to repel bugs but don't have any spray?
How do you sketch your design on paper?
jello powder
How to dull a bedside light for reading at night?
How to grab something out of reach.
push pin
To calm down a pet rabbit who is panicked,
How can I get the fish smell out of the kitchen after cooking?
To prepare the side panels of bottle holder,
How do you store anchovies?
How to attach two wooden pieces together?
how to make your own fondant?
To prevent air bubbles from forming when baking a pie crust, you can
How do I keep from my cookie from sticking
how to make snowy party mix
how to check windshield washer in car
To permanently attach lengths of PVC pipe together
Remove musty smell from clothes.
When sanding, it is important to always
To toast spices for making a flavorful broth.
To cut bamboo to a measured length, you can
binder clip
How to nail a piece of paper on to wood?
How can you make a bug bite stop itching?
How do you lightly sand any carved surfaces?
Treat constant migraines.
stickers
How do you freshen up your carpet on a budget?
What is a pithivier?
how do you do research?
To join wooden planks together for a project, you can
One is considering making cookies and is unconcerned about allergies.
How can you get the dry hair to stick to the beer can when rolling the dry hair?
How can I keep my clothes from fading in the wash?
How to toast a lot of bread at once?
How to know when to water my apple tree?
When repainting your pool, how can you find out what type of paint was used previously?
To remove egg shell from a bowl of ingredients.
potato sack
pencil
How to easily peel garlic?
To get rid of headache pains in the mid afternoon,
Prevent shoulders of clothing from getting dusty.
how do you couple something?
picture
Increase retention of study notes.
Make a privacy window.
blender
plate
To get a more precise joint between two pieces of wood.
Remove chewing gum from hair.
How to trim branches that are higher up the tree.
To ensure the entire steak is covered in seasoning
How do you make chicken tacos?
To make easy cheat's pizza
To check that chicken is thoroughly cooked,
How to whistle?
how do you use a stop sign while driving?
How do you attach survival equipment to the neck knife?
How do you open a tight lid bottle?
How to fold a ribbon easily?
To push weaved leather strips apart from each other so they don't tangle and aren't damaged.
How to melt wax.
a scale
how to make rutabega-brown butter mashed potatoes
How do you make a key lock easier to open?
How can I cut up some carrots?
How to make Hazlenut Fudge at home.
To attract bees to your garden,
How do you proceed with a yield sign?
To clean out the dishwasher.
What materials are required to take a mold of your fingerprint?
How do I shuffle through songs?
To install electric bulb in its holder.
cool down a bottle quickly
where to put your toothbrush when staying in a hotel
How to treat peeling wallpaper.
How to make a Shallot-White Wine Vinaigrette
To widen the hole in the center of a vinyl record.
To make Popsicle sticks in slats of wood for Paper Cube Night Light.
how do you check to see if a diaper is wet?
To ensure the cookie cups bake evenly
What are the actual odds of a coin toss?
To make a hamburger,
When working with glass how can I protect my eyes?
What supplies are needed to make galaxy slime?
how do you screen a call?
How do I climb a ladder
how do you buy someone off?
How can I get my black leather jacket to age well so that it looks rough without ruining it
To avoid being bothered when wanting to be alone,
how to treat peeling skin
Wax a car.
To feed eggshells to your chickens,
How do you add air to a tire?
How do I melt chocolate when making filling for pavlova cookies?
How can you make it easier to tell what each power cord is for when you have a pile of cords plugged in?
How do I wind the tape back into a cassette without tearing the tape?
Make a disposable liquid funnel.
To set the frosting on the Sweetheart cake
how do you use milk with cereal?
Open stuck lock door.
fingernail
How do you clean a bowl?
wok
How to prevent pasta from sticking together after it is cooked?
How do I get a gym membership
To pry apart the plastic casing of a laptop battery, you can
how do you use a vape?
how do you beat the timer on mturk?
How do you make a tissue paper streamer?
How do you peel asparagus before cooking?
wet floor
Remove labels and glue from jars.
Give plants more sunlight.
Making a walking stick
zoo
how to bake mac and chesse
How to prevent glassware stains from forming on coffee tables?
To keep garbage disposal's clean naturally.
how do you help a toothache?
how do you clean your nose?
To cut the tin of an Altoids container,
How can I plant flowers without a planter?
To cook the hotdog burger patties
What do you need to make a voodoo halloween costume?
How do you bring a splinter to the surface?
Carry multiple grocery bags.
hands
What ingredients do I need to make fried Oreos?
velcro
Ways to creatively wrap food.
How do I get the mailman to stop leaving packages outside my front door?
paperclip
How to have a child use a homemade glitter filled Calm Bottle?
how to keep poached egg yolks from breaking?
How can I make a smore inside?
Make scaling fish easier.
How to clap?
Prevent fish smell when cooking.
How to tighten a loose headboard on a bed?
DIY buttermilk
How to remove a stripped screw.
fingernail
How do jump rope?
What should you do if you encounter a Puma?
What is an important item to wear over your eyes when making a bicycle powered washing machine?
At what temperature does water boil
How do I prepare the yeast when making indian garlic naan?
How do you properly fluff a pillow?
To detail the interior a/c vents in your car
To prepare spinach and vegetables for a salmon sandwich.
vise
To attach pieces of wood together to make a box, you can
Whiten dark spots on skin.
how to get a great sear on a steak
Cool off the house
get pumped
how do you spoil milk?
To resolve a fruit fly problem.
How to remove pilling once it has formed on clothing?
Make postcards waterproof.
How to maximize the window on VLC media player
How do you make a bank shot in basketball?
How many legs are needed for constructing a desk?
how to dry cake pops without them getting messed up
Towels
To make a bar cart out of IKEA furnitire
how do you put a bra on?
How can you adjust if someone at a party won't speak up?
How many photos do I need to take?
To prevent gagging when feeling sick,
To prevent dough from sticking to your hands and to the counter, you can
How do i make the sugar syrup for making candy?
Make a pet bed.
To remove a hot bowl from the microwave
How to get rid of cockroaches?
internet
What temperature should the oven be set on to make banana beer nutella cupcakes?
Stick a feather in a cap.
To change a flat tire on your vehicle.
how to make a tomato and mozzarella with pesto sandwich
To put new strings on a violin.
How do you get rid of bumps after a picture has been treated to look aged?
How do I boil water?
furnace
What supplies are needed to make French macaroon ornaments?
To crush peppers, you can
Remove the head from a dead snake
How to Decorate a Cardboard Play Dome.
How to activate a glow stick
How do I get the pegs into the wood and make sure that they don't fall out.?
toaster
What kind of board can be used for drying body jewelry?
To prevent skewers from burning when using them on the grill, you can
the light
to chop the straws
How can you get over insomnia?
Dye easter eggs.
pie plate
How do you whistle?
How can I keep dust out of my mouth while sanding?
To travel with an infant in arms,
What are the steps to making a paracord eternity bracelet?
How do you cut up soap to make homemade laundry detergent?
how to add shine to hair
mousse
Increase the male sex drive.
How should I prepare the shirt before folding it?
Best way to remove nail varnish.
How do you make a copy of something with your printer?
How to keep pollen off of pets.
To whisk an egg together, you can
razor
how do you move places in the sentence using your keyboard?
What do ingredients get put into when mixing.
how do you search a video on youtube?
How can I keep my kitchen floor clean?
to  get rid of rough feet.
To cut a slice of pie to be eaten.
How can I soak up an oil spill?
desk
How to make a basic platform bed?
To prevent fingers from getting red while carrying grocery bags home,
To neutralize the flavors that have been added to cooking oil,
How to use hair conditioner
how do you squish something?
Remove a splinter from your finger.
To prevent oven baked food from burning on the bottom,
lid
lighter
To properly boil asparagus without ruining the texture,
How do you organize a money clip?
To make a baking soda general cleaning solution
To turn your vehicle to the right,
How can you make you own video game sprite craft?
To make a frame inside a cake for filling.
What items are optional when making a take-away container embroidery hoop?
chalk
Quick Classic Barbecue Sauce
Hang mugs from a pole.
How can I make a clamp?
How to Make a Gliding Car
To increase the circumference of pizza crust,
To cool down your laptop without having to buy a fan.
To find a dough to use with dessert pizza
How can I attach weatherproof plastic over a screen?
paper towel
To make a dust collector for when using sanding disk attached to a lathe.
To reduce eye puffiness naturally.
To update android mobile application.
How to attract birds?
To determine which green bell pepper is sweeter,
How can I run faster and longer?
To teach a child to tie his/her shoes
How to use a stapler
To apply ink to paper
To relieve headaches,
create a self-draining boot tray.
bag
Use eggs to condition my hair.
How can a person drill a hole into the bottom of a tupperware container?
To blow up a balloon, you can
How can I cool drinks faster in the refrigerator?
How to check the oil in your car.
how to shoot a gun
To make your house smell great.
How can you keep from marking your wall with doorknobs hitting it?
To make a detailed engraving on glass,
How do you win at Tic Tac Toe?
To zip up pants,
What is an easy way to keep a drink cold?
steam roller
To mix butter with flour, you can
How to find tiny items lost on your floor
how do you put a onesie on a baby?
fingernails
Make a summer play sprinkler.
How can I find the end of tape easier?
drawer
how to keep cheese from burning in the oven
What is the best way to apply a waterproofing solution to fabric?
how do you show you're praying?
two coins
How to cut the sweater into strips.
how do you use the command key on a keyboard?
How do you brine a turkey?
cement
To help a friend feel better when they are sad,
How to make kids stationery fun and exciting for them?
How do I turn off safety mode on a gun
ruler
highlighter
To make sure that your baby is eating enough,
Erase highlighter marks.
Fix broken eyeglasses frame.
If I find hair in my food and return it, how can I be SURE I am getting a replacement item and not the same dirty food back?
screwdriver
How can you remove pet hair from the carpet?
How to arrange a bouquet of flowers in a vase
hot water
When stamping cookies with a pattern, do you cut or stamp first?
To type the sun symbol into your computer using your keyboard,
how to make maple toast sticks
How can I keep ads off my phone when playing game?
How to frost a cake.
What supplies are needed to make a rainbow metallic wall art set?
How do I decorate a cake with edible flowers?
how do you make a mixed drink?
To find a job in a bad economy,
To make your dangerous girlfriend or boyfriend want to stop seeing you without making them mad.
how to easily peel eggs
To prevent serious emergencies in hard times,
How much cheese should I use on my pizza bread?
how do you deflate a tire?
Getting an Avocado Plant Started
kill germs on a kitchen sponge
how to bake chicken wings
how do you look for the 'help' options on mturk?
weight
building
how do you blink.
how to easily skim fat from stocks
What do you do if you hit another car?
table
Make pizza dough.
how do you make a fire fly light up?
Removing Spray Paint from Cars
how do you go to someones profile from their post on facebook?
how to stop popcorn balls from sticking to your hands while shaping.
To attach circuit components to a board, you can
How to keep your taco shell from falling over when filling it.
Get the stations to come in better on the tv.
To make a soothing foot soak
To stuff your own homemade pillow,
To make a homemade sunblock, first gather the following ingredients.
how do you set a browser as default on your computer?
How can a piece of wood be shaped into a knife handle?
To cool cookies after baking, you can
hot water
To gather the ingredients for a rice pudding desert that can be made on the trail during a backpacking trip.
Reduce ripen time for avocados.
how do you dangle something?
How can I accurately determine the height distance of a fall or a ledge?
How to make an easy meatloaf
To determine how warmly you should dress,
how do you reflect something?
How do I clean my boots?
To make a tree for a ginger bread house,
How to clean the bathtub.
drills
What materials are needed to make a motion sensing beaded curtain?
To wash your car thoroughly
How to replace windscreen wipers on your car?
attract birds to your back yard
how do you clean up the floor of your car?
How to Clear up a Diaper Rash Quickly
How do I kill roaches?
How do you finish a piece of wood?
To seal a piece of wood without using stain
How do you preserve the wood carving?
Try a raw foods diet
How to help a child sleep better at night.
how to keep knives sharp?
To fully clean out a bucket used to store pickles.
How to learn a new instrument
To attach the bottom of the mushroom cookie to the top
To clean vomit off of the ground quickly,
How do you pick a kid up?
To separate egg yolks from egg whites
Can I make my pocket friends stay in my pocket?
vise grip
How can I get my pie to cool faster in the Winter?
How would a person decide how big to make the leather piece for their knife sheath?
How to turn off the wifi on your cell phone.
how do you mic someone?
How to remove a stripped screw?
How many references should a resume include?
how to remove oil stains?
To roll a burrito, you can
How to make jello in a box.
What are the ingredients for Garlic Roasted Chicken and Potatoes?
how do you believe someone?
To prevent your bicycle from rusting,
how do you make soap that floats?
sugar
How can I seal up my drink inside a solo cup?
Prevent acne on face.
What should you buy for a new guinea pig before you leave the store?
pitcher
wire
Use clear nail polish to fix a run in hose
tin foil
How to Stop Windshield Wiper Blades from Squeaking?
mask for oil hair
How to Make Driftwood Sink in an Aquarium
How do I make a grilled cheese
How to change a light bulb.
To prevent your cell phone from ringing during a meeting,
Remove staples from paper.
How to make Mugwort tea.
Restore wicker furniture.
cup
How do I clean my ears out
how do you clench your fists?
To put on a swim cap,
dry spent grain
how do you bellow out?
Reduce inflammation from skin rash.
The timeframe in which to eat the homemade butter cookies, its best to
lap
how do you stare at someone?
If I try to refill my foaming hand soap container with liquid hand soap will it clog the container?
make pickled beets
To soothe a newborn baby,
How to make apron pattern.
Remove unwanted paint line.
Organize bobby pins.
To make homemade popsicles,
siphon
How can I know which watermelon is most watery?
how do you open the trunk of a car?
To prepare yeast to be used in a recipe,
Less Mess Measuring Sticky Stuff
Treat a painful sore throat.
To melt butter for a recipe
Cutting Out You Pattern
How do you tell a lie and get people to believe you?
How can I keep strips of inner tube in place for weaving?
How to clean a glue gun.
Collect cans to recycle and profit.
To melt wax, you can
how do you use a diary?
how do you reference something?
To get to know your garden before you plant.
how do you pin someone on the wall?
Make an eyedropper.
How can I know how much paint is in a tightly sealed can?
To melt butter to use in a recipe.
lap
Create a tire swing.
towel
make an asian salad in a jar
pipe
What is a good way to clean air conditioning vents in your automobile?
pot
How can I keep my mashed potatoes from being gray and icky looking?
What can I use as the hoop for a dream catcher?
How should I brush my teeth?
Get rid of flys
What should I turn the handle with?
How to whisk eggs for an omelette?
How to make the pot pie crust cheesy?
Prevent sticky drops from lollipop.
make spaghetti squash
How change the antifreeze fluid in your car.
How to measure the length of the fabrics.
How to boil water.
How to Use Windex to restore patent leather shoes
Find inexpensive leather to use for crafts.
how to create more counter space
Take family picture
metal bowl
how to de ice a sidwalk without salt
mold
soap
Does swatting mosquitoes help me get rid of them?
How to make Banana Pudding Tarts at home.
Trap annoying bugs.
How do you spray paint the sword?
Preparation steps to make easy salmon fillets in less than 10 minutes.
Measure wall nail placement.
Make cool designs on bananas
Clean vase with small openings.
Make a medical pillow for extra back support.
how do you wear a bra?
stickers
How can you make your air cooler at home?
How do I build walls when making a sunroom addition to a house?
how do you pull a fish out of water?
brush
how do you get rid of ants?
Make your own chocolate milk.
How do you start the basics of making a shelter in the woods?
can
To hit a home run in baseball,
To clean dust out of your keyboard,
wok
To make a ice cream cone,
To properly use a cutting board.
To defrost a package of frozen turkey
What is the best way to make a one-tree hammock?
To make s'mores without a campfire,
What is a good snack while watching movies?
To combine chocolate and coconut together to make a liquid mixture, you can
To get a cork out of a wine bottle,
Use paper mache to make a specific shape.
How to sift flour to make cookies.
how do I clean the tracks in a window
how to make pistachio-cherry buttons
To make trunk for Ferrero Christmas Tree
what to use in place of chocolate chips
ribbon
To dry your hair after a shower.
Increase the amount of earthworms in garden.
To make mac and cheese
how to put drainage holes in a planter to avoid plants drowning.
How do you make a sign?
how to preheat an air fryer
how to quickly change plants in a flower bed
How to prepare rubber surface for applying patches.
How can I slow down my bike if it's going too fast downhill?
Turn cake batter into a fully baked cake.
quickly soften butter for baking
rod
How do I take the strings off of a guitar?
What supplies are needed to make an LED Color Changing Flower Centerpiece?
How should you act if you run across a skunk in the wild?
Make pancake designs.
To cheaply sand curves with sandpaper.
To make holes in plastic without drilling, you can
How can you easily change your landscape frequently in your yard?
make hamburgers
how to make cranberry-apple oatmeal
How can I hard-boil and egg?
How to easily remove stubborn makeup?
Evenly spread sauces.
Get a free soda.
How do  you remove keys from a computer keyboard for cleaning?
To strengthen a wooden box, you can
How to color origami dragon.
Meal prep for a healthy breakfast of yogurt and fruit.
To limit the moment of inertia that can come for a poorly packed backpack.
how do you use word prediction on a macbook pro?
What supplies are needed to make a mosaic glass window?
how to make a three-bean salad
How to make hard boiled eggs
Child proof kitchen cabinets.
four bowls
How do you cut 90 pieces of wire 18 inches long in minutes?
oil
Make gift filler strips.
make sweet potato fries
how do I get chocolate ice cream out  of clothes?
When cooking a recipe that requires you to add an egg, you can
duct tape
To keep cookie dough from sticking to cookie cutters.
How do you remove creases from a shirt?
Where is the best place to stop and ask for old fashioned non GPS directions?
how do you use poppers?
mechanical pencil
Make a pool for the kids
To cut a hole in a metal can, you can
mittens
To obtain graham cracker crumbs, you can
To prevent losing your eye glasses,
What material should the handle of a wire-cutter be?
cloth
Make an emergency pants belt.
To preserve pieces of cheese you make for storage,
how do you prepare a cup of coffee?
rubber glove
How to sign out of gmail
How can I cool a batch of Halloween cookies I just made?
How do you lock rods into a baseplate?
how to rehydrate a sharpie
remove bad smells from shoes
To keep warm on a brisk fall afternoon,
What is a good material to be used for a Christmas star?
To glue the wooden pieces together in a project.
The perfect container for your raw spaghetti
Steps to make a holiday hot chocolate beverage.
Organize puzzle pieces.
How to easily prepare potatoes for a potato omelette?
To open a can of cherry pie filling,
how do you make her stick in one place?
To mix tomato chunks together to form a paste, you can
Where to keep a pistol inside the house?
Animal
How to store leftovers in a freezer
To create crack lines in plaster.
How to disinfect pet clothing?
How to remove carpet stains?
How do I ask my daughter about her new boyfriend?
How can I make fresh grains when it's hot outside?
how to be unsafe?
To stay awake without drugs.
How to block put unwanted noise while sleeping
Make a fishing pond in back yard.
To get wrinkles out of clothes without an ironing board.
Get sensitive items delivered.
How to make the backboard hanger on your jar candle?
how to be polite?
remove barcode stickers
To make a big, heavy cosplay mask comfortable to wear.
heal a paper cut immediately
How to regenerate sandy dead soil into soil that holds moisture and can support a productive garden?
How do you sterilize a jar to store homemade jam in them?
how to play war with  cards
To mark a plastic bottle for cutting,
To transfer images to a piece of wood.
To remove strawberry stems.
If I'm turning part of my wood fence into a gate, how wide should I make it?
To make paper pulp from toilet paper.
To remove weeds from your garden,
To cut the top off an aluminum can, you can
How to make a Butterscotch Meringue pie at home.
To make yourself have to pee a lot,
Make business card stick out when placing in a bowl with others.
how do you use blush?
Create a DIY window cleaner.
skillet
bottle
To make a pizza less greasy,
Make holes in recycled soda cans and use a decorative shade for tea lights
Do you need to preheat your oven before putting in an apple pie?
How to peel an orange?
To get dog urine smell out of carpet
Cover an ice pack.
to press down the inner loop of the doggie bow tie
pickaxe
To separate egg yolks from egg whites for a recipe, you can
television
How do I turn on the television?
How to defeat water type pokemon
To nail boards to the top of a wood project, you can
how to pilot holes
how do you put eyeliner on?
To remove all of the built-up gunk from your shower head,
The decorations that require you to have at least tape, stapler,  and air pump to assemble.
to safely pick up broken glass.
how do you replace something
Volunteer your time.
To keep shelled peanuts fresh,
stick
jar
To transfer a drawing to a piece of wood
What ingredients would I need to make Appleberry Pie?
What do you wear to a job interview?
how to add flavor to a vinaigrette
Creating an Exercise Routine
To grip a football for throwing,
how do you make money on mturk?
Keep your tent from becoming unbearably hot
How to replace fabric from cushion on a chair.
To be able to see underwater while not hurting your eyes and still breathing,
apply Christmas lights to Christmas tree earrings
how do you clip a dogs nails?
Escape from a car trunk.
To sign up with GMAIL
To choose a proper tool for a child to draw on fabric.
How do you change a flat tire on your car?
Loosen your hard to use zippers
How do I prepare the cartons to be used for soap molds?
To find interesting ways of beating levels on a video game,
how do you hide?
How to make a classic vinaigrette
How to plump up a pillow
pole
Remove mildew from shower curtain.
To keep brussel sprouts from sticking to a pan, you can
How do I prepare a cake
How to make an ordinary wood toy look rustic?
To help flip the lava cake out of the ramekin
Save time by cutting more than one set of dovetails at once.
To keep pen thieves away
to clean a cast iron skillet.
How can I get permanent marker off skin?
how to shoot in call of duty for the ps3
Collect cooking grease.
For a huge cupholder
To make a string easier to thread through a needle,
How can I keep wooden pieces of a picture frame together?
To clean blinds properly.
sandwich bag
protractor
How to bake blueberry tarts at home.
movie
how to bake salmon
Good tool to cut out a wooden template
Sweeten coffee without sugar.
How do I keep my homemade slime from getting hard?
How do you stick a vintage stamp on an envelope?
How can I get an elderly person to hear me better?
To store grill utensils for easy access.
Make Citrus Fruits “Juicier”
How can I protect carpet from dust while remodeling?
how to make sesame balls
Battery on your phone running low?
To make pencils out of wood scraps.
how to make hot chocolate
how do you hit something?
To ensure sensor switch is not actuated by the weight of the cat bed place on it, but only by the cat laying in the bed.
how do you release pressure on something?
How do I get rid of spam emails
How to determine where the shape begins and ends to make a knife on a piece of iron.
To light the candles at a Birthday party.
What kind of topcoat is best for wood pieces that will be kept outdoors?
Password protect a smartphone.
To gather ingredients to make an onion pakoda,
keep paint trays clean
to make a natural remedy for colds and flu.
how to make nutty oatmeal cookies
how to wrap homemade soap
To allow dog to adjust to grooming shears.
how to save time ironing
silverware
Prevent early frost on plants.
How do you secure a dog in a car?
To add hair to a wool dog coat to make it warmer.
How do you feed a guinea pig fruits and vegetables?
Make crab cakes without frying in oil.
What do I do once my egg whites are foamy when making pavlova cookies?
To stir flour and water together to create dough, you can
To make peanut butter easier to get off of a spoon,
How to make Chocolate Peanut butter Snickers Ice Cream at home.
When do I cut the semolina mixture in the pan when making a basbousa?
To make a loop in a piece of copper wire, you can
Where should I put the holes for the metal bar ?
box cutter
Remove odor from litter box.
To wash apples,
To create a air-conditioned fan,
q-tip
chop sticks
To hold pieces of cardboard together while glue dries.
How can I make a banana dessert from mexixo
How can you get crumbles out of your keyboard?
how do you walk in a circle?
To get short lines at an amusement park.
To make tip for throwing spike.
can
fire
bobby pin
how to make spiced orange wedges
To remove flan from ramekins to be served, you can
If you are struggling to make a lay-up in basketball
Make a paper laundry hamper.
To come up with a coffee mug coaster when you don't have one.
How do you scoop up hickory nut meat that has been mashed together with its shell?
How do I fix a toilet that runs?
how to get blood stains out of fabric
Make a slow drip water bottle for garden.
To remove the skin of a tomato,
To fix screw holes when they are too big for the screw.
cardboard
One wishes to finish their lumber nightstand.
One seeks to catch eyes when traveling.
emergency fix for a wheel that has broken off.
plastic bottle
How do you empty a water bottle?
To cut the carbon metal tubes from an old bike.
To prepare the butter to beat it light and fluffy for buttercream frosting.
How do you use fly tape to catch and kill flies in your house?
how do you lose something?
How do I naturally get rid of mosquitoes at my home?
Make your own charm bracelet.
Reduce bickering between siblings.
teeth
To crack an egg, you can
How to thicken a chicken pot pie stew?
wine bottle
How can you get free Krispy Kreme donuts?
How can I get twice as much juice from lemons, oranges, or Limes?
To prevent baking soda from absorbing more moisture, you can
To prevent a saw blade from rusting
remove food coloring stain from counter top
When modifying an old fridge, it is important to
How To make a sweet vanilla Souffle
To ensure the glass is cut by dropping hot metal into a bath of oil and water.
To make a U shaped toilet seat more comfortable,
how to citrus quinoa salad
How to stuff egg carton to make fire starter.
What is the first step to designing your own leather wallet?
Make dutch honey syrup (like caramel)
fork
How many coats of paint should I spray on my eye glass frame?
To make topping for donuts.
Make a star shape with flat bamboo.
How to remove excess grease from bacon?
Animal shelters
hands
kiln that burns
hose
how do you spoil grape juice?
To whip the coconut cream,
mittens
How to prepare a loofah for use.
How do I make pie crust?
What's a shake that can be made with fruit?
Removing Spray Paint from Skin
how do you polish something?
How do I sooth sun burned skin after a beach visit?
What do you need to finish a cabinet?
To find a space large enough for an office set up,
how do you start siri using the touch bar on a macbook pro?
Use the sun and a magnifying glass to start a fire.
Crazy glue
To save dishes when serving condiments,
Clean spilled food in the fridge.
To quickly clear out a room full of cigarette smoke,
To scoop cherry filling onto the tops of cupcakes, you can
Remove dust from blinds.
To wrap a weenie in some bacon,
How to make sure that a hairpiece is not visible in your hair?
get batter ready to bake
Nail polish only the top of  a fingernail
How to Create a Recessed Audio/Video Pier for a Wall Mounted TV.
To make an Italian beef sandwich
To make a basic loom with PVC pipe, what do I need to use to make the pegs?
Remove hair frizz.
How to Make a Natural Skin Peel
What goes good with cucumber and cabbage?
how do you keep handcuffs from tightening?
How do you clean the fridge  door.
how to freshen stuffed animals
How do you crumble Feta cheese?
how can I quickly clean a bong?
can opener
tape
telescope
To attract butterflies to your yard,
To use bags tea to make dark circles go away.
To remove permanent marker from walls
To install a sound bar for your television.
Developing a Sports Practice Schedule
To thaw out meat quickly.
how do you turn off a fire alarm?
straw
To cut a can open, you can
Distract kid when moving.
How to Open Cable Ties
How can I easily add waves to long hair?
To keep water from coming out the end of an airbrush and ruining the paint.
To make tea,
Make a dust pan.
How can I organize screws and small parts when dismantling small items?
How to prepare the reeds for a Drinking Straw Oboe
how to make ham and cheese rollups
To prevent a house from becoming too messy too often,
how do you get a sponge ready to wash dishes?
What should I do if I have unused boxes of feminine hygene products?
How to clean narrow-neck bottles without brush?
Make a line tensioner.
How to store some chips you've already opened?
how to easily peel thin skinned fruits
To stop your stomach rumbling in a public setting
how do you browse a library?
How can I clean a car seat?
How to change engine oil.
fist
couch
How do you clean a cutting board?
how do you heal a sprained ankle?
To wash the leeks thoroughly.
To protect your feet from harm while walking outdoors,
bobby pin
cardboard box
Tighten loose screw.
To make purple paint,
paper towel
large glass
Making a beautiful paper lantern.
How do I get white shoes white again?
how do you turn the volume off on your iphone?
If you need a fire and can't find kindling
To make your windows stop rattling during windy days,
To remove stickers from containers when you're out of oil,
Prevent ice crust on ice cream surface.
Make sure the fluffy ball fits snugly in the cap
how do you kill a bug?
how to make eggs with bacon bits
clean flooded basement
Need to remove curry stains from your white stove?
How to polish tarnished silver jewelry.
To process the florets into small pieces
To make the top and bottom of a log smooth and flat, you can
How to mark all emails as read on gmail
how do you propose to someone traditionally?
clothes pin
how do you get rid of the red notification circle on an app on an iphone
How to keep from saying the wrong thing.
PDF files
What supplies are needed to make faux lily flowers?
How can I get my trash can clean outside?
Fix blurry smartphone camera.
to make scrambled eggs in the microwave
hand
how do you run a nickel coverage in football?
How can you tightly reseal an opened bag of food?
how do you cash a check?
to make salad tastier.
Make a scarf.
Anchor cords so I can braid them easier.
What flour would I need for butter cookies?
dish towel
To clean a shirt quickly without laundering it,
To bake brownie cookies,
phone
coin
What kind of paper can be used to smooth woodworking projects?
foot
To determine if a nutrient on a food label is important,
To thoroughly mix the dry ingredients for a chocolate cake.
How can I reduce my attractiveness to mosquitoes?
Deodorize bathroom after use.
bobby pin
How can I grab metal out of a tub of corrosive liquid?
how to make a tent floor more comfortable
To ensure that two ends of string stay together, you can
How to clean a greasy BBQ grill without using chemicals.
Reduce hand cramps.
What is the best hangover breakfast you can have that will help you recover?
How to make asian sauce to brush over ribs.
mirror
How to easily prepare onions to brown them in a dish?
Use dirt from outside to clean oily hands
To keep a newborn baby healthy,
How to condition hair naturally.
How do you get to the bottom of a dope can?
How do you edge your yard?
How to Detect an Aneurysm
What will you need to paint a coffin?
How do you keep insects out of a garden?
How to Make Delicious Scrambled Eggs
cereal box
how to make a hot gingerman
How can I get my cat to start using her litter box more?
how to make double shell tacos
To easily roast an onion,
To make a peanut butter and honey sandwhich,
How do you release pressure from a pressure sealed container that is clogged?
shovel
How to create a color shade on a light?
How to make Chocolate Pay Day Bar Ice cream at Home.
To drain the juice from the coconut without having to remove the entire the husk.
How can I cut a cake that I made for my son's birthday?
How do I obtain an error code on a broken Xbox 360 that can't output video?
tweezers
Save space with medicine.
Deter slugs from garden.
How do you make a pixel heart out of paper?
tin foil
How do I start growing a giant pumpkin?
How do you make wings on a superhero helmet?
To iron the wax out of a wax silk painting.
How do I measure properly when making a garden fence with a look-through design?
How can you make a zip tie phone holder?
For an indoor garden, it is essential that the space for the garden
To preheat an oven to be used for souffle, you can
corn syrup substitution
How to infuse coffee flavor into syrup?
Reduce inflammation for better sleep.
What pieces should be harvested for steampunk props.
Convert a wooden hanger for necklaces.
How to dry and hull walnuts.
pole
to boo a comedian off stage?
Use AAA batteries in a AA slot.
What do you do if a screw is rounded?
To attach felt together, you can
Remove seeds and the center from a jalapeno.
To dissolve sugar in milk, you can
To turn a wool sweater into felt, you can
how do you turn on a motion light?
When making a wood turned lamp do you use all the same shape of wood?
How can I disguise medication for a dog?
To cut a perfectly straight line with an x-acto knife
Personalize words on an m&m candy
To get the inside guts out of a pumpkin.
What do I do with it afterwards?
To help identify luggage easily when travelling,
To turn a block of cheese into shredded bits, you can
How can you make a floating shelf?
What can I do to gain weight right
How to turn pear slurry into a sauce?
how to make a kumquat saketini
To score a perfect 300 in bowling,
To easily blow up balloons for a party,
How to make a cold cut sandwich.
bobby pin
To kill an infestation of book mites.
tweezers
Upcycle your aluminum cans into planters.
To teach a baby to be more comfortable putting their head under water,
To put custard inside of a donut
What can I store brownies I bought at the store in?
easily peel a kiwi
How to Serve Wines
How can I delete an app on my home page from my Samsung Galaxy S7 phone?
How can you lose weight more easily?
To swallow bitter medicine
how ot make water color for painting.
toilet paper
box
To minimize getting paint on other things when taping
candle
To crack an egg shell, you can
How to wash clothes
How do you put insulation in a wall?
How can you cook shrimp on the stove?
wite-out
How to remove mud stain from your pants?
What is a good, flavorful oil for frying doughnuts?
To sanitize your dogs food and water dishes,
Make a finer scrambled egg
how to remove stains from marble
how to clean your shower head
How to make a simple handle for a knife without a handle?
Disinfecting your sponges
To place a design on a wooden piece to be cut
To verify the angles of the cuts you have made in a piece of wood.
Keep your matches dry
how do you strengthen your teeth?
To tell if a hard boiled egg is fully cooked.
To win at tic tac toe,
How can I make a bologna sandwich, filling up all corners of the bread?
how do you lick something?
How to clean a dirty bank card strip so it works effectively?
How do you make a braided ponytail bun?
To keep a piece of cotton tinder protected from water, you can
to avoid getting sand into your beach bag
How to fill nail holes in walls.
To style your hair,
How can you remove excess moisture before caulking your tub?
To make money from old books,
How to avoid dough sticking to pan.
How to add tomatoes to a guacamole dish?
how to make clear ice
Make a business card holder.
open a stuck jar
To light a campfire.
To allow for a smoother application of liquid eyeliner.
Calm a frightened dog.
How to Assemble the Triangular Frame for a Simple Pneumatic Machine
How to make Ginger Candles at home.
cut off the bottom edge of the bag
How to measure a cup with no measuring cup.
ice pick
To make a clear filling for key lime pie
How do you keep Nintendo Switch games stored safely?
Starting off the base of the shed.
To clean a ceiling fan.
Retrieve a stuck chip bag in the vending machine.
how do you put a nose ring in?
How do you hang a picture on the wall?
Reinforce glued together wood pieces
To keep trading cards safe while playing with them.
Build a campfire.
How do you get the electricity turned on at a new home?
What materials are needed to make a longboard?
How to you cream the butter and sugar when making chocolate bread?
how to make buffalo corn
ice pick
keep finger from getting cut on phone
How to draw a perfect circle
What is needed to make pepperoni pizza?
petroleum
Before you begin etching a stenciled design into glass, what should be your final step.
To make a tiered cupcake for a cupcake sundae.
What is the hole on the end of my pan handle?
To cook gnocchi in water
How to prepare sheet metal for drilling into
how do you launch something?
To keep sweat out of your hands while playing sports,
To make a cute decorative key holder.
how do you accent a letter when writing?
how do you turn on the cold water in a faucet?
Make a knit pillow.
handkerchief
To put hair into a bun
If you are at a hotel and run out of chargers.
Secure standard band-aid on fingertip.
How to get the yucky crumbs out of your cereal?
paper towel
How do you fry a steak and it rare?
To check if a piece of chicken is cooked all the way through,
Put moss into a tiny bottle with a cork for wearing around your neck
When drying clothes, how can I get the wrinkles out of my clothes faster?
To dive into a pool,
To make popcorn on a camp fire,
How to keep fruit fresh in a fruit bowl?
Preparing the chocolate
To clean a glass window,
Store leftover pasta sauce in individual portions.
What supplies are needed to make a hanging planter out of old T-shirts?
To position the avocado pit for growing,
sandpaper
Create a mini movie theater.
aluminum foil
How can you make your own Chicken Soup at home?
What should I use to give the hook pendant a professional glossy finish?
How to install solar lamps outside.
how to easily clean your stove burners
Determine if a metal is ferrous or nonferrous
How do I geocache
To break an egg, you can
How can I hold my hammer onto my ladder?
Remove oil from hair.
To prevent batter from rising and spilling over dish while baking
how to roast vegetables in oven
how do you dance with someone?
Tiki mugs
To prepare apples for apple sauce
can black forest cake be made fast?
Remove stems from strawberries.
Protect tree sap from rodents.
To increase the speed of fraying for the Denim Frayed lap Quilt.
Sharpen a dull razor blade.
How do I bathe the pears when making baked pears?
how to keep drip pans clean
how . do you power on a car?
Learn how to put the shine back into patent leather shoes.
To purchase a commodity in amazon.
Clean out candle holders
DIY ice cream treats.
how do you investigate something?
Create a noise maker.
Prevent bird droppings on car.
Prevent a cold with liquid.
toilet tissue
how do you fill a gas can?
Make outdoor blanket.
how do you display something?
How to train your rabbit to sit?
How do you finish felling a tree after making your wedge cut?
How do you add corn starch to the water?
How can you get wrinkles out of a shirt without an iron?
Soften a painful pimple to pop.
make chicken salad
push pin
How long can bread pudding keep after it has been made?
What is a Quadrilateral
What is the best program to use for illustrating your own Instructable?
mouth
Using the precision tape measure.
How can I make table legs?
How to charge a phone.
How can I make a cool bed for my small dog?
how do you match or choose complementary colors on a color wheel
To open a soda bottle.
To get softer and more beautiful skin.
To prevent a potential thief from shop lifting at your store,
bowl
how do you put on a clip on tie?
To charge a power drill battery,
Prepare peaches for a Tangy Peach Gelato recipe.
easiest way to create an egg wash?
What is an ancient method used for long distance communication?
How to make a necklace from buttons.
What to do if your windshield fluid reservoir is empty?
how do you use a fly swatter?
How do I make my homemade salsa extra spicy?
To make lemon curd in the microwave
How to Light a Fire in a Fireplace
To turn your canvas shoes into waterproof shoes.
how to move daffodils
How to store paper so it doesn't develop any damage?
To score the dough for a better rise while baking,
potholder
computer
One seeks to keep their hydroponic system in good shape.
how do you take a shower?
What to use as fuel for mini stove.
How to Make Crushed Ice
Prevent rust on steel tools.
How to make coasters easily?
funnel
How to cut off the base of an aluminum can for a craft
how to easily shuck corn
Cut a loaf of italian bread to insert cheese
How can you change a baby's diaper in a pinch?
Fighting
how to easily grate soft cheese
Make toast.
Prevent flying clipped finger nails.
magazine
To prep the baking sheet,
How to produce simple blonde highlights in your hair?
How to reshape a baseball cap?
how to clean a granite sink
How do I load a frosting bag?
Increase drainage of garden pots.
vibrator
How to get lipstick out of clothes that have been dried.
To salt fries before cooking.
To make bed frame made out of 2 by 4s look pretty
How can I open a stuck screw on lid?
Keep electrical extension cords plugged together from unplugging
Grow your own Cilantro.
Make a helium alternative to fill up balloons.
To cut pieces of wood to equal sizes.
To prevent a shaving blade from rusting,
How do you prevent cranberry fruitworm?
How do you trim your bonzai plant?
Remove scuff from tennis shoes.
Prevent messy pancakes.
To add a nice contrast to the layered plywood of the media center
How many needles are to be had while knitting?
how do you return a hit on mturk?
Flattening soda can.
Picking a meat to go with crispy Brussels Sprouts.
how do you peel a banana?
sharpen pencil
how do you add friends on snapchat?
oven
How to bake Crispy Baked Plantain Chips in 3 Delicious Flavors.
How can I scoop ice cream easier?
How do I bake the meringues when making pavlova cookies?
ice
How can I keep my towel from falling off the handle of the oven or fridge?
To make frosting.
How to make a friendship bracelet.
fridge
Recover a lost balloon at Disneyland.
to fix squeaky shoes
shot glass
To prevent wood from moving as you apply torque while drilling it, you can
If I'm out of mod-podge, what is a substitute?
how do you boil an egg?
Make a travel mug.
How to sharpen knitting needles?
To make chocolate milk.
hose
How can you open those terrible impossible to open plastic containers merchandise is sold in?
What kind of paper should I use to make paper beads?
How can I turn a cake mix into cookie dough?
how do you cuddle with someone?
attach the lights to the clothes hanger
how do you spoil a baby?
How can you tell if a sink hole has stopped growing and can be filled?
how to season a hamburger
Grow an herb garden if you have no actual soil.
What can I do with left over coffee grounds?
What kind of cake is best to make cake pops?
To clean glasses on the fly,
To help smooth out uneven frosting on the spongebob cake
what is the most versatile tool in the kitchen?
how do you use the headphone adapter for an iphone?
To clean a TV screen.
To peel apples,
What do you need to make a hat?
how do I make green goddess dressing?
key
Keep track of expensive items.
To secure a piece of leather under a laser,
To attach a 12 volt DC adapter to the power wires inside the cordless drill.
To attach felt to a piece of wood.
how do you sign something?
To add butter to dry ingredients like flour.
How to Kill Hydra in a Freshwater Aquarium
teacher
avoid water spillage damage from an incubator
How to get a kid to stop sucking his thumbs.
To evaporate seawater to make it drinkable.
How to make Lime Mango sauce at home.
What should I do with my windows during the summer?
Remove felt tip ink stains on wood.
How do you get a dead fish out of a tank.
How to quickly cool a warm can of soda?
Knife
Supernovas
To take a screenshot on Samsung phone.
To be able to spend more money than you earn?
Prevent getting bit by bugs on patio.
To plant rosemary springs,
How big should the entire shelf unit be when making easy cardboard shelves?
Make a nose palate cleanser.
microwave bowl
In order to dig up weeds from your garden
To cut a metal bar into two equal sizes.
To round off a piece of plastic being used for a finger stylus.
To transfer batter to a pan for baking, you can
To make a knit fabric lay flat when sewing.
How can you use an iron to make bacon?
How to create a weed free flower bed.
After making butter, to seperate it from the buttermilk, you can
make a malt
How to check the oil in your car?
Remove mildew from tub.
To make homemade soda from syrup and carbonated water.
To dispose of acid at home,
To see if a pair of jeans will fit you without trying them on.
How ot make a milkshake at home
To grow new green onions using old ones,
box
Organize toddler bath toys.
How to pack knick knacks when moving when you have no paper.
To unlock Knuckles in Sonic Adventure.
To mix butter and eggs together, you can
To install a game to xbox 360.
How do you install a CPU in a computer?
To get the smells out of a dirty, old gym bag.
make ashtray
what can I subsitute for mayo?
remote
how do you remember someone who's died right after they die?
Make a recipe book.
To create lemon zest.
How to infuse cucumber flavor in water?
To make homemade laundry detergent,
eyes
how do you use a sleeping bag?
get rid of bed bugs
How to remove skin from a chicken drumstick?
To start a car.
How do you measure birch bark to cut it?
How to get rid of crows.
How do I fix the mold on the wood frame ?
To lose weight by changing the seasoning of your food,
How can I stay healthy in the Summer?
Open the plastic packaging from the store quickly and easily.
How can I organize parts from a disassembled device?
One seeks to protect themselves while biking.
To apply a decal onto a golf cart
What can I use to make a cross on my necklace?
to get the best flavor from your spices
How to prepare fabric to make a wrist wallet.
To score an albatross in a hole of golf,
To make pizza from scratch.
quarter
How can I coupon
how do you know if the meat is cooked properly on a charcoal BBQ?
To make an easy bread,
How to fix a broken toilet lever.
How can I make popsicles for a dog?
To measure dark brown sugar
How do you unzip a pillow case?
remove permanent marker from carpet
Homemade glow stick
How can you decorate a cupcake without frosting?
how to stop a leaky pipe from dripping
how do you wear an apron?
to finish making bath bombs after they've been poured into a mold
How can you naturally get rid of bags under your eyes?
cook vegetables in the air fryer
lights
How to glue in pairs for your birdhouse?
How do I make a GIF with my cell phone?
To saute garlic and onions, you can
How to Make a Pipe Cleaner Christmas Tree
How to sweep the floors in a house?
how to make a ricotta-honey sandwich
How so I cut up a long strip of leather from the 45 cm diameter leather disc ?
How to clean car battery Terminals?
What do you need to make a concrete tea light candle holder?
rubber band
What type of boots do I need to make winged boots?
The time to set to bake for the muffins.
to protect the insect hotel from the weather
how to get rid of hiccups?
How can you let air out of a tire?
How do I prepare the balloons when making chocolate balloon bowls?
video
Prevent drips from ice cream cones.
bowl
How can you prevent sparks inside the tank when cutting an old propane tank?
music
ice cream scoop
To clean a window without any paper towels,
Prevent corrosion on gun ammo.
bat
To prevent the bread in the flowerpot bread from sticking after cooking
how to make breakfast cheesecakes
To mix butter and other ingredients to make frosting, you can
How to cut out your shirt design?
How do you make bread with ice cream as an ingredient?
Sharpen drill bit
quickly chill a drink
How to secure a rubber to the back of a pencil?
How to construct your brass key?
how do you put a shirt on?
How can I keep my bags of chips closed and fresh?
whisk
To ensure clean lines when spray painting,
How do you clean the solution off the shoelaces?
Speed up small wound healing.
how do you spray something?
Preserve expensive lipstick.
how do you play tag?
how do you use a belt?
how do you scatter something?
vise grips
To keep new shoes in excellent condition,
To prepare a cake tin.
How to keep coffee fresher longer
What is a safe blade to use in a decorative guillotine?
How do I roll a twenty sided die?
how to get rid of bitterness in coffee
To form your ingredients for bread into a dough?
Make a jump rope.
To create a good password.
How to clean and degrease your oven.
How do you remove wallpaper?
make easy ginger apple sundeas
How can you convert a t-shirt into a rag?
Increase comfort of high heels.
To stop the clock in a basketball game,
To season a turkey for deep frying,
how do you win tic-tac-toe?
Reduce scarring from a burn.
Create a sausage soup
What is the best way to make strawberry milk?
How to remove the seeds from a whole tomato?
How can you keep swimming goggles cleaner longer?
To cut a Roma tomato into uniform chunks.
Fit a candle into smaller candle holder.
To bake the best sponge cake.
How to pop popcorn in a microwave?
shape a soda can
Play games on a cell phone without a heavy load on the battery.
make an egg over easy
Prevent frostbite on hands.
To collect rainwater from a downspout during a storm
Add grip to toddler socks.
What ingredients do you need to make a coconut pie?
Reduce pain from physical impact.
How to prevent a pizza roll from being dry?
How can you get rid of fruit flies without poison?
fingernail
how to serve ice cream to large groups
How to best grow a mango sapling?
How do you cook mashed yams?
How can I keep a pot from boiling over the top?
To create a groove in a piece of wood.
how do you scope an area out?
Where is the best place to store a cooler when camping?
To dry wet clay teapot
How can I warm butter quickly?
What goes in chicken pot pie?
coffee filter
Jump start a car battery
How to set up a space for multiple gardners?
Make a necklace.
What is the best way to apply frosting spray to a glass window?
baking powder substitiution
How should I protect myself while handling the corrosive/dangerous salts?
pants
brine a turkey
To treat minor burns
How can You make your home smell great?
How do you remind yourself of an event?
How to dice bacon
To connect a gaming console to the television,
Prevent a hangover.
cup
make strawberry and cream sandwiches
To increase the amount of nutrients the body absorbs,
To core an apple,
Create zoom for smartphone camera.
How do I cut the PVC post?
How can I mount a bike rack in my garage?
How do you throw a cornhole sandbag?
Avoid throwing things in an argument.
Where to dispose the seeds of an apple?
water
How to withdraw money from the ATM?
To make a steampunk bicycle light
How do I beat Halo 4?
How to curb your dog?
How do I bend the bracket in the lamp socket?
To make a trick Tootsie Roll
how to make farro-stuffed peppers
How do I bake a potato in the microwave?
mirror
One wants a light-weighing costume for their puppy.
software
How can I keep my chair cushions from sliding?
Remove grease from hands.
Reduce drying time of cold sore.
Fix your broken keyboard feet
To toast spices
How to dry your laundry.
One seeks to be more green.
To make ice pack that doesn't leak,
To make a crib usable again when a child outgrows it,
how to make a memo board out of silk
how to get a moist cake
To cook a steak rare,
ice pick
How do I rip toilet paper off the roll
To draw a design onto slices of wood, you can
how to make a perfect hamburger patty?
Is there some plant that will keep ants out of my garden or house?
What are two things you need to have before you start working with lye?
how to use a shrin wrap bag
Self destruct lost debit card.
How do I glue hair to a piece of aluminium foil ?
how to make a milkshake without a blender
To collect nail cuttings as you trim your nails.
receipt
How do I get rid of a cough?
Make lid for open yogurt container.
How to ensure windows stay clean over a long period of time?
How to fill your car with gas.
telescope
Defrost frozen food.
How can you made a fruit fly trap?
how to keep herbs from going limp
What do you need brown makeup for when creating a voodoo doll look?
Add a lamp socket to a piece of mahogany wood
How do I roll the dough out when making croissants?
What color is blood under the skin
To cut a piece of lumber to the right length, you can
To prevent a cake from sticking to a pan, you can
How do I avoid getting excess spray adhesive in the mold when making concrete countertops?
potholder
How to use your lazer from a printed sheet?
Transfer homemade cleaning solution from jar to spray bottle
Pad
internet
To protect your tomato plants on a cold evening,
How do I mark where to cut the copper pipe when working on a plumbing project?
how do you put deodorant on?
how do you sit on a couch?
To roll out the dough,
how do you bowl?
Reuse an old mailbox in your garden.
To get your rental security deposit back,
What is the current standard way for a bystander to provide CPR?
Make a cookbook holder for cooking
hat
To freeze homemade popsicles until they are firm.
brick
How do you put a glass thermometer in the aquarium coffee table to make it readable?
How to fix a zipper that won't close?
Clean your shower heads.
How can you untie an "impossible to untie" knot?
To ensure garter band won't slip when wearing it.
Brush your teeth.
traffic cone
How to sharpen a knife with a sharpening rod?
How do you win in tic tac toe?
how do you milk a cow?
Fix squeaky leather shoes.
how do you make a bike move?
To open a jar and pour out its contents,
Add an ornament to a wrist cuff.
Where do I sit so I get the best sound in a movie theatre?
How can I protect pictures for display without a picture frame?
To warn against cats and predators staking out bird feeders
How do I treat ant bites
To make a no-sew pillbox hat, what should I do with the scissors?
napkins
How do I get rid of carpenter bees?
placemat
How do you kill ants instantly?
To help remember your lunch when leaving for work,
To slice red bell peppers,
How do I attach two or more pieces of foam together.
How can I use toothpaste to clean my shoes?
How do I add glitter to a single pine cone Christmas tree?
make instant air conditioner
Measure something without a ruler.
To get more from each melon when using a melon baller.
How do you do a crossover in basketball?
make kiss biscuits
Before you dissemble an electronics or furniture, what should you do?
Prepare the bread for a grilled cheese
To save a paper full of writing or drawings that's gotten wet,
how do you take a screenshot on your phone?
How to decorate eggs for Easter.
How to use whatever you have in your fridge
earring back
To attach the legs to the table with the frame.
Where do I locate Horologium constealltion
To make bananas stay fresh for a week or more
How do you prep an old painted wooden nightstand top, for a new coat of paint?
How to access brightness settings in Windows 10
To use a coupon at the grocery store
To get lemon juice from a lemon
how to make a good salsa
paper clip
highlighter
how do I make bircher muesli?
what spices does tikka masala need
Blender
To get dust out of a rug
How can I amplify my phones speakers without electrical magnification?
How many cookies does a coconut chocolate chunk recipe make?
Treat a bad sunburn.
How can I scoop ice cream easier?
Why would someone want to make an inkpen from a feather?
Adding foam to the helmet
how do you clean fish poop?
How to make Pineapple Guava Syrup at home.
How to sew the hem on the square skirt.
To sift flour,
telephone
To change file name of a document.
rubber band
What supplies are needed to make herringbone film strip window?
To make sure your dog gets enough exercise
How to fold a t-shirt.
Attaching chains to the base of the chandler.
how to make blt potato salad
To trace a pattern onto a piece of cardboard,
can
how do you get sober from alcohol?
What can you use to flatten dough on a floured surface if you do not have a rolling pin?
To keep yourself healthy after working outside,
How can I get rid of my cat's fleas and clean it?
To affix fabric onto wood, you can
To chop onions, you can
How to sunbathe?
What is needed to make an X braid?
how do you use the sweatcoin app?
What's the best and cheapest way to check my printer functions?
To remove tape from a glass,
plastic wrap
car
wood plank
how to make stained glass
To download an application using android phone.
To scrape off untidy sections of paint from a wooden project, you can
How to cut wooden planks.
How do you steam clean carpet?
To keep the zipper from getting stuck,
To put pillowcases on pillows easily.
How to prepare your onions to be onion rings?
cleaner
To add flavor to a hotdog, you can
To make sure the shelves in a video game holder are level while gluing them.
To make a room without windows feel like it has windows in it,
linen
how do you empty a bag?
moss
glass
what to wear when working in the kitchen
Making the heart shape
how to do spin painting
How do you get gum off a carpet
Is there a less formal way to say hello in German?
how do you let another car know you're stopping?
Remove rust from car.
How do you add flavor to scrambled eggs?
What supplies are needed to make a side window sun shade for the car?
What filling do I use to make a clear lime pie?
When is the best time to see stars
To get a brown, thick crust on homemade bread.
key
knife
To make a coffee that is more delicious than you are used to, you can
how do you close a cabinet?
How to paint shield to look realistic.
Should you rinse the buckwheat noodles after cooking them?
To teach a blind dog how to sit,
vase
make crescent sausage casserole
how do you focus on something?
how do you lay down?
When working on a project that requires sawing through a book, you should
How do I charge my phone without a charger?
how do you sit on a bike?
How to quickly chop or dice hard boiled eggs?
How can I infuse my Olive oil or other oils?
how to match flavors
To measure strips of denim for weaving,
supress
towels
To help prevent acid reflex after eating a large meal,
What is the best glue to use for popsicle sticks?
Make banana sushi
How to light a campfire
how do you fold a folding table?
Reduce amount of fruit sugar.
How do you break a rock?
Clean inside heating vent.
A plastic container
How to make Sweet Potato Tarts at home.
To lose weight,
How do you ruin shoes?
Get stickers off of a window.
To open a jar that will not open up due to its lid's tightness,
to drink slowly?
Clean leather seat cushion
How to store DVDs without using any shelving?
To cut planks of plywood to size, you can
Maximize space in a deep shelf.
how do I make turkey rice casserole?
Where to ideally store nail polish in a household?
How do I prep the clamps when making an industrial picture frame?
To put a fitted sheet on the bed
how do you send a text after typing it?
The best form of head for making watermelon
How to wash salad greens
ruler
shirt
How to prepare saplings to build a cage
How to cook pasta.
how do you stop snoring in your sleep?
To keep pets safe when leaving for vacation,
How to remove dust from lamp shades.
What kind of tape is best for long term usage?
How to turn on a woman?
How can I save money on toner or ink cartridges?
What if there is a show I want to see on Netflix but they don't have that movie?
make whipped cream
How can you tell someone is lying to you?
How to thread needle
how to make ambrosia salad
Unfold a folding table
Where can I store my books
How can I keep a room from getting too dry?
Make instant coffee
To bend brass wire into geometric shapes,
Freshen up tired eyes.
How can I get my leather car seats clean?
how do you turn off an iphone alarm?
fingernails
To record bass instrumentation with just a guitar,
To cut a sheet of wood for the bottom of a frame, you can
How much salt should I add to homemade salsa?
How to remove a mole at home.
How do I brown the ground beef ?
How to make Apple Butter tarts at home.
broom
To keep clothes from smelling like mildew in the closet.
What is olive oil made from?
How can I remove eyeliner mistakes?
Maple syrup
When making a clear lime pie, how long should I wait before eating?
how do you catch mice?
To crumble bleu cheese with your fingers,
How can I remove a splinter from my palms after handling wood?
How can prevent stains from forming on my coffee table from drinks or hot food items?
To play as Tails in Sonic the Hedgehog 2.
Where can I find a book to read
How do you make your own air freshener?
To rebound the basketball after a shot,
how to make cajun catfish tacos
use nailpolish for color coding keys
To increase your vegetable intake if you don't like the taste of them,
To make a room smell clean and fresh,
To have a porous lining in the bottom of soda bottle hydroponic garden.
To locate studs in a wall,
riding a bike for exercise
To stuff the inside of a paper mache creature, you can
Grill corn on the cob
How to quickly defrost chicken breasts.
To land safely when jumping from a moving object,
To shave the weekday names off a pill container.
Table saw
How to Make a Monster Energy Drink Can Light
To seal paint onto PVC piping for cosplay batons.
how to clean out a peanut butter jar
What do you need to make your own sports drink?
To clean a touch computer screen without damaging it,
How to make a cherry Cobbler at home.
How do you use a pedometer?
Protect check from rain.
To cook the mini pizza,
How do I evenly cut the puff pastry when making strawberry napoleons?
What to use to dig soil from the ground?
How can you make stale cookies softer?
To remove a stamp from an envelope,
How can I get rust buildup off tools?
how do you destroy a monitor?
Make a strawberry milkshake at home
How do I cut pool noodles?
How To Drink Coffee without Staining Your Teeth
How to easily glaze a batch of donuts?
Prevent dandruff.
removing pit stains
Double check makeup with natural light.
How can you paint a bowling ball so it can be used to make a Garden Sphere?
How do you keep homemade bread from drying out?
Cool down a hot car quickly.
Safeguard coffee table for kids.
To make a dog stop howling so often,
How to clean salt from shoes in winter?
Make an organic whistle.
how do you report something being stolen to the police?
To melt coconut oil that has hardened,
How long do you need to bake bread for?
What do I do before I glue parts onto the wood of the self- defense table?How do you attach the bat to the self-defense table?
To drill a hole in a wooden block to a specific depth, you can
floss
watering can
How can I smooth sharp dog nails?
To open a coca cola glass bottle top
How to Easily Remove Garlic Skins
Prevent take out food from getting cold.
To keep leftovers for longer in the fridge than in the leftover container.
ziplock bag
What are the ingredients to make key lime pie ice cream?
How to make lemon zest
godparents
How do you soak cashews to soften them to blend them for a dressing?
Make an organic sponge.
How do I connect a monitor to my computer tower?
underwear
Prepare utensils for easy transport.
plastic sheets
how do you use a rocking chair?
how do I make pulled pork?
How to break brittle when it's cooled and done cooking.
How do I make scrambled eggs in the microwave.
To remove the protective layer from leather
magnet
how to remove mildew
How to ensure a drink does not dilute while still being made cold?
how to julienne cucumbers
how do you do something slowly?
How to pickle celery
How do I cut a circle out of fabric to make a pouch?
strawberry shortcake smoothie making
Are there any unusual uses for a Coke can?
Make Hamburger vegetable soup at home.
How can I keep dough from getting hard to roll out and fold between rolling?
To reset a router.
How to keep the airflow vent on a fan clean from obstruction?
How to cook brussels sprouts
How to keep condiments from falling out of the fridge?
how do you bend something?
Prevent shampoo from hitting kids eyes.
To separate salt from water that it is mixed into,
Can table salt be substituted in place of sea salt when cooking?
To make a pretend cross bow
Prevent bacteria after washing hands.
how to keep cookies from sticking
To save lobsters for later after cooking them, you can
how do you dispose of sanitary napkins?
how do you make your car stay in one spot.
sheet of paper
To prevent avocados from browning as fast in the fridge, you can
clay
Make hooded bath towels for children
To help feeling busy when working inside,
How many bananas are used in banana beer nutella cupcakes?
lighter
How do I do sit ups
To remind yourself to drink more water,
How to make fried oreos
How should I move the table at night?
handkerchief
how is watermelon mint dressing made?
Make plastic book ends.
How to Make Wood Slices for easy Pyrography Ornaments
How can I get my facial hair to be shorter?
How do you sand paint off of wood?
pine shavings
Remove grease deposits from kitchen drain.
How do you properly store freshly dried herbs?
universal stain remover
How to cool down the whey quickly?
what planet is the brightest
Seal the ends of a plastic drinking straw.
how to make peanut butter fudge
relocate a house spider outside
To catch a fish while using a fishing pole and a bobber,
To make 'snow' on top of your chocolate yule log cake
make tandoori lamb
To sew the side pockets to the doggy vest.
Keep wind from blowing away cupcakes at picnic.
How to wash strawberries.
DIY soap by melting soap base food coloring and molds in a microwave, scented with essence.
To dry out a wet electronic device,
What items do I need to make a skull out of duct tape?
How to make White Kit Kat chocolate Ice cream at home.
To keep a broken lid on a cooler
How do build the container for my electrolysis bath ?
how do you risk something?
How to make Chocolate Mounds Candy bar Ice cream at home without an Ice cream Freezer.
Filter water using a charcoal filter.
wedge
pie plate
Make temporary caulk.
pen
tube
How to remove the helmet from a batman costume after use?
how do you use a hairblower to dry your hair?
tack
How to make paper stick to refrigerator
How to quickly cool down coffee?
How to hammer in tent poles
When baking nougat in the oven, you should
To make ice last longer in a cooler.
how do you use a tanning bed?
Avoid foggy bathroom mirrors.
wite-out
How to make an easy face mask at home?
Scrape fabric pills from hats.
How to store cans for recycling?
To prevent the dough from sticking to the plastic wrap while rising
how do you correct someone?
how do you refresh a webpage on a browser?
To make a cardboard egg shape.
How to change the video quality on Youtube
To charge the battery of a smartphone,
How to Make a Girl Miss You
Collect compost in a disposable container.
To make Christmas gift opening less confusing,
To make sure that your child's clothing options fit as they grow quickly,
How to lubricate sticky windows.
How do i stop dough from sticking to the surface while I am kneading it?
To add smoke flavor to your gas barbecue grill top.
How can I cleanly make crisp fat free flour taco shells?
How to protect your work surface while staining wood
To cut the bottom off of a can of pringles, you can
sleeve
How to Remove Rubber Gloves Easily
To get rid of moles in  your yard,
To thicken your homemade sweet and sour sauce,
make squash baby food
After gluing and clamping wood in a project, you should
what to do with herb stems
To cut up pieces of plastic
How do I redeem a game key using Steam?
How do you prepare the best breakfast potatoes to go along your eggs?
How long should you let wood chips smolder before putting food on grill?
To measure out the fabric needed for the doogie bow tie
For a migraine
How do you remove odors from refrigerator?
How do you make laminate countertops?
For hot days to avoid scorching seat belts buckles
Cook eggs in the toaster oven
To keep your vacuum cleaner in excellent condition,
how to seal dryer vent leaks
Cook multiple hot dogs at once.
how do you clean up water off the floor?
To set the clock on a VCR.
Make a blanket ladder.
how to freeze berries
Make a floating ice cooler.
How to break down a cardboard box that held crackers.
To help to dissipate the tension after upsetting someone,
Make analog fire alarm.
What shirts should be hung as opposed to folded?
How can I write on my sidewalk with my kids without making it permanent?
How do I place the biscuit and butter mixture in the pie dish when making chocolate nutella tart?
To attach an ornament to a glass globe.
How to apply facial scrub to skin
How to ripen a pear?
To put several items in a computer in the same folder.
how do you sniff something?
how do you know a dog is on its period?
To clean my hair.
To make a Fire Beacon for camping,
how do you open a hotel room?
how to make creamy blue cheese dressing
Make roasted potatoes
To ensure the Vertical Strawberry Planter drains.
How do I cut the metal slide of the drawer ?
how do you wear a purse?
Remove grease from car tools.
make an all-purpose cleaner
how do you pigtail your hair?
To add milk to coffee without making a weird layer on top,
To help make a pillow fluffy again after many uses,
how to make kale chips at home?
How can I clean between the stones on a ring?
How to cut bamboo skewer in half
Prevent toilet paper waste by kids.
What supplies will be needed to make a raised garden bed?
How to wash the hat without damaging the ears?
logs
To coat wooden coasters so they can withstand moisture from drinks.
How to remove a splinter from a hand or foot?
How to Get Fruit Flies Out of Sink Drains
How can I make a cool pool toy?
To catch falling dust while drilling into a wall,
plastic cup
How to patch up a hole in drywall.
container
To cut a slot in a wooden shield, you can
How to Make Easy Chocolate Ganache
pet mouse
Make wrapping paper glossy.
hydraulic press
How can I easily store small amounts of unused paint?
how do you file your nails down?
How to make a cast iron frying pan non stick?
Removing moss from your steps.
To cut a strip of LED's and ensure they stay functional, you can
how do you transfer unpolished steel tubings for your project?
how to make spanish pimiento salad
Improve mood quickly.
To dust off a desk fan.
to make my chili hotter.
How to set up a chess board.
ribbon
ice cream scoop
Make your washing machine smell good
How to make Pork Chop Stew on your stove at home.
How can you get people to be nicer to you when working customer service?
Prevent baby from making toilet roll mess.
What sort of sharp instrument should be used in constructing Halloween costumes?
To make remembering which shoe fits on which foot easier for kids,
How can I cool off the pie that I just finished baking.
How can I disinfect legos?
To thoroughly rub batter into a steak, you can
keep pants up
razor blade
How can you test ribs to see if they are fully cooked?
How do I chop the onions ?
how do you use underwear?
How can you identify often used key's quickly?
How to get more volume in your hair
Roast a chicken
To convert whole nuts into small bits, you can
to keep a keep safe while at the beach
how do you make koo-laid?
To get rid of oil stains on your driveway.
To hold a ribbon in place when it's wrapped around a vase, you can
To staple 2 sheets of paper together,
What is the first step to chopping garlic?
Boost shine of hair.
How do I clean paint brushes after egg tempera painting?
To store homemade whipped cream and use it before it goes bad.
how to make coconut-almond cooca
To prevent fragile items from getting damaged while storing.
How to make tea with no electricity.
How do you open your hood?
To form apple galettes.
How to easily portion cookies for baking?
how do you pounce?
What is the original groot made of?
Identify if a car is following you.
how to set jelly that is runny
living room
What size does the screen need to be cut?
How to chop wood for the fireplace.
When planting a garden what should you consider when placing the plants?
How to get the unpopped kernels out of a microwaveable bag of popcorn, before serving.
how to make bacon-cheddar scones
To make your own free mulch.
To find a stud inside a wall without a detector.
How can I make a mandarin orange strip to easily eat the slices?
Make pancakes.
What can I use to upload photos
To keep a check firm and protected from weather,
how do you binge something?
Make a snowman.
To cut shapes out of the dough,
How do I cut the wood for a hexagon display shelf?
How to open a blocked nose?
To make a lime rickey,
Clean hard to reach areas of a bottle.
sand paper
To soothe a fussy baby at night,
How can I join aluminum pieces together?
What do I use to glue down the CD pieces?
Prevent toothbrush from falling from sink counter.
Keep your closet fresh & dry.
To remove clumps from cornstarch, you can
To make an iron mask with a face plate that opens side ways instead of top to bottom.
How to apply an ice pack to a wound.
Clean dirty clothespins
soda can
How can I neatly keep my laundry soap?
How to cook pasta
To secure heat shrink tubing around metal wire.
To remove the core of a cupcake so you can fill it with frosting.
How can I relax if I am feeling particularly anxious?
Clean stains off linoleum.
To sculpt a round shape out of wire to be used in a bike sculpture.
To get rid of a spider without hurting it,
mittens
How to build your own cat tree.
How to subscribe to a video creator on Youtube
What can i use to go faster to work
How do I mix weed killer in a manual sprayer?
how do you crack an egg?
how do you switch facebook messenger accounts?
plastic wrap
how do you mark a word with a proper name?
Prevent lost TV remote.
how to make campari fizz punch
How to make Old Fashioned Vanilla Ice Cream.
Test strength of seeds.
How do I cut a piece of wood for my project?
To activate the yeast for the cinnamon bread
What do you need to make an explosive alarm clock?
To make emergency face scrub
To make a rainbow bridge for a decoration,
shampoo
How do I cream together butter and sugar when making chocolate bread?
How do I wash my silk fabric tie-dye after I applied the colors ?
Four-Ingredient Mango Float
How to make Jell-O.
How to trim a wall with a paint brush.
Learn how to get a wooden box ready to paint, to use for jump ups for athletes.
Create drums for babies.
Where to store the compost in home?
telescope
Prevent boiling water from overflow.
What is an easy way to clean your clothes better?
How do you put rubber gloves on so so they don't stick?
table
What can I use for legs in a portable camping side table?
toilet tissue
how do you chase a shot?
To clean out the port of a phone charger,
Create a first aid kit container.
To ensure that chopped zucchini stays firm
How do you make a cup of tea?
Make a quick meal after drinking to prevent hangover.
After you knead your homemade bread dough, how long does it take for the dough to rise?
To ensure you do not get a hangover after a night of heavy drinking,
To decorate the donut cake
How can I clean my gutters without climbing up high?
Prevent children from wandering in parking lot.
How can I pack a small makeup kit to take on quick trips?
Prepare an aquarium for fish
How to slice bananas for crepes.
Make a cup speaker.
To stay warm in winter if your pants are too thin,
To lean an instrument for playing jazz,
napkins
Making Orange Essential Oil in a Jar
To play pin the tail on the donkey without using a dangerous pin,
How can I reinforce my reusable grocery bag so it doesn't break at the bottom?
To be prepared when in the wilderness, you can
How can I recover stretched fabric?
how do you use cooking oil?
Make sure all the pieces of your leather-working project match up for assembly.
To score 3 points in a football game,
Make a rustic shower head.
How to make an Oreo cookie crust.
What gear do you need when making liquid soap from scratch?
How to make Vanilla Oreo Fudge at home.
To remove a sunny side up egg from a nonstick pan,
blackboard
Spin a top.
how to remove glue from bonding surfaces
Setting Up Your Study Space
How to make a saline solution.
hook
soldering iron
Placing boards onto your platform for the floor.
mixer
To attach two separate sections of a wooden plank using a brass hinge.
Where can I watch free tv
How to keep croissant dough at an even thickness
To chop basil
To fill a fish tank,
how to make pasta with pesto
How do you peel the husk from a hickory nut?
Do I need to get all the stuff out of the clay?
Wipe desktop computer screen with scratching.
To convert dough into a flat, pliable state, you can
To add a fresh smell to your car,
How do I make a hexagon shape out of a piece of wood.
Spread frozen butter.
How should you cut tomatoes in order to put into salsa?
How to file an insurance claim for a dented bumper.
Make a small table.
How to prevent damage to the riding seat of a bicycle?
To quickly chill custard,
How to purchase a commodity from Amazon
how to make cuban mojo dressing
clear up hazy haedlights
How to clean dirty battery terminals.
Cut a very small paper disc.
how to make a bank deposit
How to remove water rings from furniture.
To dry fresh wood before you cut it
Clean the interior of washing machine.
To keep carrots fresh,
how do you borrow something?
To add a protective finish to a wood project,
Take a family picture with 10 people.
ice pick
how to clean a porcelain sink
To encourage your child to follow your rules,
Prevent germs from trash can lid.
How to secure letters onto styrofoam sign.
To replace ear cushions on headphones.
What can I do for emergency preparation?
how to tell if seafood is bad
How to sift litter through sifter.
To re-wire your brain to be happy
napkin
How to take a tablet?
how do you take anti depressants?
How To Make Cheesy Ground Beef Bell Peppers
hatchet
How long should the dimensions of the wood be to build an easy cleaning guinea pig cage?
How do you pick a lock with a knife?
To separate egg whites from egg yolks.
How to whisk cake mix
What is the best heading/title for a resume?
Make checker piece set.
soften brown sugar
grater
how do you put pigtails on your hair?
How to core an apple?
To obtain shredded cheese, you can
Limit the amount of soap that comes out of pump dispensers
To remove freshly baked, hot bread out of the pan,
Remove loose hair from dog's coat.
To attach a 2X4 to a 4X4, you can
how to make a breakfast egg salad
How do you get rid of a sunburn?
How to trace dragonfly wing stencil onto metal.
how do you set a song on repeat on spotify?
vise grips
To prepare the baking dish for chicken parmigiana,
To finish the bottom part of the mushroom cookies,
To slow cook ribs.
Reduce sound of sink drips.
To open microwave popcorn.
baby wipe
how to melt butter on the grill
How to shred chicken in seconds
To make a movable handle on the wire bender.
Remove bad odors from oven.
To make sodium carbonate, you can
Mount curling iron.
index card
D.I.Y crazy putty with crazy sand and glue.
How can I trace a leaf for a craft project?
How do I protect a sun room addition from wind when building it?
how to make cheesecake bites
What can I use to cover my brownies when I want to save some?
How do you identify a queen bee by the behavior of the worker and drone bees?
Make cupcakes.
how do you see if an iphone is on silent?
how to boil eggs
How do you whittle a stick?
how do you contaminate something?
textbook
how do you fail at something?
How do you make a diamond shape for the tetrahedral kite?
How do I repair a tiny tear at the bottom of a bridesmaid's dress?
How do I create a Facebook account
drill
sleeve
make breakfast potatoes
foot
To sweeten something without using honey, you can
To prepare metal for welding, you can
When you find yourself looking in the fridge out of boredom
washing machine
To make the individual loafs for the spanish bread
how do you wear a jacket?
To protect your carpet when sewing
To easily recreate an image many times repeatedly,
plastic cup
brush
How to Bookkeep
To add wooden teeth to a plastic pumpkin, you can
Support drooping plant.
how do you help a hangover?
A handy way to store your makeup brushes
One wants to put a new twist on Valentines Day.
placemat
To light the room up.
To make an origami crane  with different colors using the same paper.
How do you protect a pool in the off season?
Make a soft boiled egg ( a three minute egg)
Make vegan alternative to chicken nuggets.
how do you celebrate an anniversary?
Reduce amount of unpopped kernels.
When do i eat breakfast
To sharpen a dull knife without a sharpening tool,
To feed a family easily without much time,
Turn on oven and bake ingredients that were added for cookies.
How to take a a fun and interesting selfie.
How do I chill a tiramisu before serving?
How does one make a call from a telephone booth?
cutting board
To allow a marinade to soak into chicken, you can
how do you use a coupon at burger king on your phone for a pickup order?
How to prepare a pan for triple chocolate cake.
How to slice a lime
to remove smell from shoes
Dry up a spilled glass of water.
how to make compound butter?
Reduce pain from a punch to the stomach.
How do you peel garlic?
Candied Orange Peels
how do I fix the wire on the penny ?
Use your smartphone in the rain.
Remove excess salt in pan.
How to Make a Magnet Trampoline
How do I fix the L-profile on the board ?
how do you dry a babies nose?
To ensure the router bit isn't taking too much off of the wood when flattening wood with it.
Keep bathroom tiles clean.
Reduce shininess of makeup.
To remove the paint from a bike before you repaint it
container
paper bag
To separate egg yolk from egg white, you can
how do you clean your ears?
steam roller
How do I add the butter to the biscuit crumbs when making chocolate nutella tart?
Create fertilizer from the kitchen.
Clean baby highchair after meals.
How can you help your immune system?
How to make a more spicy pumpkin pie spice?
to pasteurize eggs
How do you remove a flat tire from a car?
Shred carrots.
To make the best use of space while packing,
When do I give gifts to someone
To make raw popcorn kernels in the microwave,
How do I stand a bike up
After removing old paint from the concrete surface of a pool, how should you then clean the surface off?
To secure a bolt in place, you can
To make a candle from a mold
How can I easily hang up something with 2 or more catch points on its back?
To attach a button to fabric
To remove the handle from a scooter, you can
how do you eat chicory root
how to make sesame-broccoli salad
How to get elected as a president in the US?
How often should air filters be cleaned or replaced?
dumbbell
To create flaky layers in biscuits.
What can you use to make your arm warmers inexpensively?
To cool down cake
How do you hang a curtain from a chain?
Make uncut bag for lawn mower.
how do you co-sign on something?
stick
How do I finish my strawberry napoleons after I drizzle them with chocolate?
Prevent soot during campfire.
bobby pin
To change the volume on the television
Make your own table from what you have around.
Watch a Youtube lecture faster.
Make coconut oatmeal in a jar
how to get points in badminton
How do I get all the water out of a garden hose before storing it?
chalk
stainless steel bucket
To drill a pocket hole into a piece of wood
how to get rid of yellow stains
How can I get rid of a migraine?
How do I hone the back of my chisel ?
soda can
To make a homemade granite counter cleaner.
How do you maintain a honeybee foraging garden in your yard?
Why do you need a filter layer under your gravel driveway?
Repair loose button.
how to make temporary tattoo at home
how do you look through all the app pages on an iphone folder?
How to make Paper-Mache glue.
To disinfect a wound, you can
How to Cure a Stomach Ache
how do you open the flash on a nikon b500?
Prepare boots for waterproofing
Create quick hot chocolate drink.
How to elevate the taste of your chocolate chip cookies?
Bracing the base pf your platform with 2 x 4.
to light something?
To get rid of a wart without the pain.
To teach yourself to play the guitar,
Easily remove chewing gum from shoe.
concrete
To keep condiments separated on a serving table,
how do you powder a baby?
In order to dye a piece of fabric for a cosplay outfit,
How to prevent large air bubbles from forming when cooking pizza dough?
how to slice vegetables, paper thin
To determine the appropriate length of leather bracelet using an old leather belt.
To make yourself a bowl of cereal for breakfast,
toothbrush
oil
To keep your bathroom clean easily,
How can I treat a razor cut on my face?
TO catch a fish,
how do you clean up liquid off a floor?
To make your own pinata,
What is the easiest way to roll sushi.
To make a piping tip from a soda bottle,
How do I make sure the yeast activates  well in the pizza dough?
Heal cracked skin in the winter.
how do you get rid of trash?
how do you shape your eyebrows?
back of hand
hose
How to Color The Design on A Pyrography Ornament
Remove baked on food from a cooking pan without scrubbing.
To measure lines on cardboard to cut, you can
Set up a simple Kratky Hydroponics Grower.
Colonial furniture
clean your hairbrush
To avoid getting a bad hangover while drinking,
picture
how do you get rid of chapped lips?
To determine if an avocado is ripe for eating,
To hold a nail in place while hammering, without risking your fingers,
How to boil liquid?
Improve memory with gum.
How can you attach your sawzall knife blade to a handle.
index card
loofah
To maintain your garbage disposal
Prevent tears when cutting onions.
To print a design to be transfered to fabric, you can
To finish a triathlon event,
make butter in a mason jar
table
I cannot find sinopia colored paint   - is there another color I would be able to substitute for that?
What type fruits can be used to infuse into ice cream?
Attach two pieces of wood
To prepare the avocado pit for planting,
How to Make a Tabletop for an Easy Collapsible Worktable
To stay a float while swimming without using your body,
Take away the hiccups.
Repair cracked water bottle.
what to do with extra whipped cream?
How do I know much frosting I need for a cake?
Make a locket using a shotgun shell.
shirt sleeve
What is a potluck
how do you drink a capri sun?
Best wick material for a lamp
Is beet juice useful for other things besides drinking it?
To keep your medicine cabinet organized,
How to order at Starbucks
Get rid of skunk smell off your skin.
To make it easier to roll meat together, you can
Build a fort.
To drive metal pipes into the ground, you can
To give shapes to a paper mache Halloween mask.
What is the best way to remove the paper image once the design has been transferred to a wooden object?
What type of chainsaw should I use to cut down a very thick tree?
To catch a baseball,
To ensure you are protected when deep frying something, you can
To get your car to accelerate.
Reduce discomfort from rocks during camping trip.
Clean keyboard keys.
Shine chrome
whisk
In order to light a candle,
how to store potatoes and onions
Get a birthday travel discount.
To find the center of a coin, you can
forks
Reuse the cover of a book.
Make alternative cooking spray.
How do I change up the colors in my home
How to make jeans look unique?
How to make a nintendo switch RCM jig.
Clean body odor without deodorant.
how to make corn ice cream
How to Cook Asparagus
To open laptop screws.
how do you destroy something?
ice cream scoop
How do you remove the central metallic holder of a whisk?
How to make lasagna without using an oven?
How to quickly mash apples?
To make 'magic chocolate shell' for frozen desserts.
Easiest way to make round eggs, for sandwiches.
Sharpen kitchen knives.
Dehydration
To make a home made engine with a spark plug start.
how do I clean old plastic?
vinegar
how to remove stains from ceramic tiles
How do you melt the wax down when making a Fire Beacon?
how do you cooperate with something?
Prevent cat from unrolling toilet paper.
make dandelion root tea
Where can I buy some paint
To get rid of fleas.
What sort of brush should I use for the yarn wefts when weaving my own wig?
To attach a plastic pipe to a wooden cart, you can
coconut lime tea
A hot glue gun
how do you make a bubble bath?
how do you spill something?
How can I adhere a Christmas CD wreath to my door?
How to mix paint quickly?
To light a candle that's wick is really, low,
To help a mechanic determine the issue involved with a car,
How to roast carrots.
how do you hot box a car?
how to take oatmeal cookies to another level?
To keep bread dough from sticking to the table,
To prepare dough to chill in the fridge, you can
How can you get rid of scuffs on a hardwood floor?
How to keep a book open without using your hands when reading in bed?
where to store spices for optimum flavor
To make the stem of a duct tape flower,
To engrave a name in a wooden tray for a loved one,
How do I get my cell phone working it it's being weird
How do you strain juice out of cooked blackberries?
What is the best way to light birthday candles that are already placed on a cake?
Where can I find a gazelle
To reuse cooking oil.
To firmly set pieces of PVC joined together by elbow joints.
To make a garden storage bench.
To get the best deal at a buffet,
how to create a mini first aid kit
book
spray
What is the best way to keep your car windshield clean?
How to tie mesh together to stay as a cylinder.
Prevent fading from black clothes.
To make the front panel of a wooden doghouse easily removable.
fingertips
To make the remote on your key reach a longer distance,
To make music easier to hear,
To turn on a power screwdriver.
Wrinkled shirt, no iron!
How to dice bacon
How can I keep my trash from getting soupy at the bottom?
To soften the butter needed for the cookie cats
To test batteries to see if they're any good,
Making a Shine-Boosting Mask
easily peel a kiwi
Keep clothes clean during move.
make breakfast casserole
When gluing wood together, you can
how do you turn off an alarm on an iphone?
Starting to Aerobic Exercise
How can you attach a paperclip to a plastic baggy?
To make a portable pet bed
Create a homemade Sprite slurpee.
velcro
Keeping a food journal
how to core an apple
To turn on the television,
how do you skid?
How do I get a can of tuna open that doesn't have a tab?
How to Make a Quick and Easy Margherita Pizza
How do you put a body harness on a dog?
To saute garlic for Creamy Vegan Mushroom Spinach Sauce.
how to calculate miles to kilometers
How to Borrow a book at the library?
how do you stop someone from overdosing?
To  get rid of pimples naturally at home.
How do you clean the irons in your set of golf clubs?
Collect rain water for gardening.
Make your house smell nice.
how do you get rid of a mustache?
how to remove tire marks in a garage
sleeve
Organize q-tips and cotton balls.
Keep door close in public bathrooms without lock.
To hold down a keyboard note without using your hands,
Clean tiny areas.
how do you give your opinion?
How do I make sure my cat's fur is not matted or tangled?
To allow natural defrost on your windshield,
What is a good alternative to meditation?
To flip a pancake in a pan,
How to rough up the rubber on a inner tube to get a patch to stick.
To prepare yarn to accept dye, you can
To prevent strawberries from going bad when storing them in the fridge,
eraser
How do I clean super filthy sneakers that I have?
How to make a handle for a sword?
How can I get a good grip on egg shells that fall into the egg I am cracking?
How to clean out an empty glass bottle?
How do you mail an envelope?
how do you bonk your head on something?
plastic cup
To get sugar to dissolve into water
how do you scope something out?
What items do you need to make a wall pencil holder?
How to make pita nachos
How do you keep a door open?
Make a long spear.
To add a layer of modesty to a short sleeved dress without taking away from the cuteness of the dress,
To make food wild birds will find irresistible.
To prevent food from burning when you bake it in the oven, you can
how do you make rice?
Untangle a shoe lace knot.
How do I wash my hair in the shower?
How can I fry excellent bacon in my oven?
To prepare the ingredients to make a homemade loaf of bread.
To make a stencil for screen printing on a t-shirt.
What is the first step in reducing costs and saving the world?
how can I propagate an orchid?
soda can
How to make a ham sandwich?
To help skin stay clear of acne,
knives
How to use Scrabble letter tiles to make ornaments.
Make a scarf holder.
To put several files in one folder in a computer
To sleep more comfortably when you're pregnant,
Create paper chopping board.
What can I use as an emergency cooler if I am out of space at my home party?
beads
What supplies are needed to make homemade shoe polish?
What is a cheap way to make a mold for plastic blocks.
To send a letter in the mail,
To store the cowboy cookies
To iron crisp lines in fabric.
make a pineapple upside down cake sundae
can
How do I prevent my pipes from freezing in the winter when working on a plumbing project?
How to prevent fire embers spitting from the fireplace?
Why do First Aid Attendants use rice for injuries?
horn
how to clean white glue spills on a rug or carpet
Prevent mess when peeling food.
To cool a pie after you've cooked it in the oven.
how do you boss someone around?
how do you use foundation?
how do you translate from spanish to english?
To prevent becoming sick when riding amusement park rides,
To thin acrylic paints, you can
What tools do you need to solder?
Sharpen dull knife.
crayon
How can I make money at home?
How to roast garlic for a garlic dip?
To wash mud off of a car,
how do you swipe up on a phone?
how do you adapt to something
how to keep food hot on your plate?
To put together torn pieces of a letter, while preserving it's contents.
how to make boozy eggnog
Keep cake warm and fresh for a party.
Who can I get to make me food
save a cut avocado
To get a design on wood without a laser cutter.
How to I prepare my tools to make whipped cream?
make brown rice with leeks
how do you collapse a folding chair?
How to test if a toilet is running.
Keep cake frosting standing.
To help children feel less afraid of monsters at night,
straw
To polish a hex nut,
To make a cake look nice and cleanly decorated,
baking sheet
How to make Vanilla Butter Finger Bar Ice cream at home.
A smelting machine
What can be used if you want to knit but don't have access to knitting needles?
How ot make  hair thicker naturally
To treat a burn that is very minor,
How can I never lose my keys?
scissors
How to make a hole in the bottom of a galvanized metal bucket for a craft.
What is a good way to find your lost phone.
How to cook spaghetti
How do you get rid of stink bugs?
To remove grime from individual metal components, you can
To begin a project, you can
One wants to cook while camping.
How to check your fridge's seal.
rain
wok
how do you propose something?
How do I make a lamp that is bent?
To prepare the coconut milk for whipping,
What kind of paper should I use when making the fidget spinner?
What is the best way to remove painters tape after you have finished frosting a window?
To make sure that a bolt stays securely inserted in a piece of wood, you can
How to make a square with a sheet of paper?
What can I do with my spare change to save it?
To dissolve salt in water,
tote
How can I save my shirt if I got some coffee on it?
To trim the grass in your lawn,
To save flip-flops with split holes
Freeze leftover chili without staining the bowl
how to make gluten free panko bread crumbs
How to remove hair from peach skin?
Increase softness of lips.
To clean up spilled nail polish.
how do you scatter something?
To make green paint,
how to make spiced beef rice pilaf
How do you remove excess hair from cat?
microwave
To attach a piece of paper to itself to make the lid for a paper box, you can
Make fruit filled ice cubes
To melt chocolate for fondue.
How to make Zesty Fruit Salad
How to Glue Pieces Together to Assemble DIY Ultraviolet Torch
How to thicken tomato sauce without changing the flavor?
How do you keep cold air out?
Make organic breath mint.
How to thin a soup that is too thick?
dirt
Make a pumpkin from a toilet roll.
To score lines on a piece of brass, you can
To combine ice with liquid ingredients, you can
Clean lint trap of laundry machine.
stakes
To attach paper labels to glass spice tubes.
To get an inkpen to write on paper,
To make a spoon out of a plastic bottle,
floor
How do you cut a piece of PVC pipe?
To prevent a bra strap from being visible on accident,
To increase body strength without access to a gym,
How to make a simple marghertia cocktail?
vise grips
How can I like a picture on Instagram?
To prevent from shorting out electrical components in a computer when touching them, you should
To cut a shape out of leather,
penny
To pull coconut off a tree without any tools.
To add diameter to a metal pipe for making a light saber.
how to evenly distribute butter in pastry dough
How do I fix a hole in my wall?
To prevent white clothes from turning pink, or other colors, in the wash,
Use ACV as a toner
How to clean your jewelry.
how to make a simple syrup
How to carefully water a plant?
flour
To measure your wrist for making a bracelet,
What can I use to slice cheese?
How can I cool my home during the summer, with no Air conditioning?
To seal egg rolls when you are a vegan,
Make natural closet air freshener.
To remove the paper used to trace the image onto the wood if it sticks.
how do I get eyelash glue out of fabric?
How can I remove skin from chicken?
How can I keep my bartender from getting rid of my drink if I have to go to the bathroom quickly?
Reduce midnight cravings.
paper clip
How to cut a wall to install an outlet
Cook an bacon in the air fryer
To use potatoes to make your face look more youthful,
To make a burrito,
How much dog food do you feed a medium sized dog weighing around 30 pounds for each meal?
To clean the inside of your car fast.
To mount heavy things on the outside wall
How do you repair a burned hole in your carpet?
Using bread to make bread pudding of any kind
Block Caller ID function.
To crush strawberries to make a sauce, you can
How to make avocado toast.
What is an alternative for origami paper?
How to water a garden.
To make a room smell nice,
Where to buy wood for a simple bookshelf.
Prevent damage to smartphone battery.
how to make rice, beans and collards
To wipe the residue from a label
How to fasten a makeshift namebadge?
Remove shingles from a roof.
food processor
leather conditioner
How to install the pump for livewell?
To find the center of a block of wood, you can
To plug a sega genesis controller into an atari 2600.
To make a light bulb terrarium, how do I add dirt and gravel after I've removed the top of the bulb and cleared out the inside of it?
how to make a tire swing
How can I make a neat trash bag dispenser?
How can my toddler keep all their toys together while bathing in the bathtub?
How to switch off a television.
coat hanger
To attach the weed fabric to the base of the Vertical Strawberry Planter.
To unscrew a screw from a wall outlet without a screwdriver.
Box
Learn a new language without formal traning.
How do you cut printed font onto Styrofoam?
To make round slices of same thickness from wood.
Increase life span of flowers.
fingernail
To cut a q-tip in half, you can
To prepare a wire to be combined with another wire, you can
To get my bike seat to be more comfortable.
To clean off the leather seats in a car.
What is the best way to combine apple slices with sugar and spice when making apple roses?
To clean the body of a tuba
how do you play on a trampoline?
How to make blue ice cubes
how to dye your hair blue with no chemicals
Insufficient funds
To reinvent yourself when you move to a new school,
how do you collapse a tent?
To make an effective homemade cough syrup,
How to cut out the inner part of the plates.
how to make farmer's cheese with apricot toast
To grow your own lemongrass from store bought lemongrass.
To get bugs to leave you alone when you are hiking?
plastic toys
fire
What will happen if I accidentally eat the sticker on my fruit?
To reheat pasta in the microwave without ruining the texture,
How to cut out pattern pieces on garment.
Keep cloth napkins secure before meals.
To keep a baby warm without any risk of suffocating from the blanket,
To make fairy milk
To hold the glass game board vertically to its wooden base snugly.
How can I make flavored dip or mayo?
What tools do I need to make a magnet drywall?
To decrease the number of calories you consume while drinking soda,
To make a personalised mug
How do I cook the aluminium wrapped quesadilla with the steam iron ?
how do you turn on a nikon b500?
how do you designate someone?
To stain wood in patterns
butter knife
Prepare graham crackers for making pie crust
To earn money from old clothes you want to get rid of,
To cut seams off of old piece of clothing.
how do you ghost someone?
How do I flatten a fat chicken breast to make picatta?
To keep your air conditioner running smoothly,
To change the dimensions of a piece of metal, you can
To measure the thickness of cardstock, you can
To clean the dirt and grime off of an interior wall,
to keep car doors from freezing shut.
How to quickly melt chocolate?
How to Season Apple Slices to Make Apple Roses
How to best protect food from cockroaches?
how to install your cars new battery
how do I stop my chicken from turning on a skewer?
What can I use to write my shopping list on?
To apply blush to one's cheeks.
How to make Hazlenut Nutella Fantasy fudge at home.
how do you use spotify?
Spread seeds in garden.
How do you glass a surfboard?
Materials needed to make a wooden wedding ring.
Store emergency wipes in car.
How to keep house plants alive.
How do you start a baby quilt?
how to make pasta with garlic & broccoli
how to cut through scum in the bath tub.
how do you know if a crock pot is on?
How can I make fake snow for a child for sensory play?
fist
Make eyebrow groomer.
how to make green paint
remove dust from binocular lenses
shovel
Absorb odors from shoes.
How to prep potatoes to make french fries.
To get kids to drink milk,
To prevent cookies from sticking to a baking pan, you can
To pick blueberries quickly
Check the tread on your tires.
clean baby toys
how do you pause all of your pandas on mturk?
Frisbees
How to shape soap.
To melt the chocolate needed for the mine craft dirt cake
How to re-purpose an old, thrift-store lamp.
To prevent trash from falling through a bag and into your trash can,
How to counter act too much salt in your food dish?
To attach a keyring to a hot glue stick, you can
piece of wood
How to clean bathroom mirror.
How do I stay focused on what I am doing
To remove ink from the sterilized cans,
To avoid cramps when running
What to do when a dog is barking at you?
To trace a line that you plan to cut on a piece of paper, you can
Choosing and Blanching Peaches
chop onions easier
feet
Make a smartphone holder for airplane flights.
What are the best conditions to cure concrete when making a concrete countertop?
How to make whipped cream at home?
Improving Your Soccer Skills
How to make a white wash.
how do you repent for your sins?
What is a good way to stay focused at your desk job?
To label various cords for easy identification,
How to remove the needles from a cactus paddle?
TO change the color of a board to white,
How to see more stars when looking up at night?
how to float flowers in bowls of water
How to paint old keyboard.
To add nutrition and a chewy texture to sweet potatoes, you can
To harden the chocolate on the rainbow cookies after frosting
how to pick a good pineaapple
How can you dry clothes more quickly in your dryer?
How do I fix the small wire tree to a rock ?
How do I prepare frozen cookie mix to make cookies?
pocket knife
How do you get the seeds out of a pepper?
How do I beat egg whites to make macarons?
How do I scrub a stain out of my carpet?
To play a simple E minor chord on the guitar,
To get information out of someone
tongs
What supplies are needed to make a multi-holiday wreath?
To save money when you need cash,
Store frozen bread buns or rolls.
mouth
To help diet without changing how much you eat,
stockings
how to make hummingbird food
How do I get gunk off of my sofa?
How to cut out the hole for fabric and hinges.
To replace the power supply on a PS3.
How to portion baked chicken into 4 ounces.
To tear aluminum foil from roll,
Remember parking spot.
For making a jar of dandelion honey, how many dandelions will I need?
To make shredded cheese, you can
How to remove stain from wood counter-tops?
Can I cure concrete outside when making a concrete countertop?
To draw someone's eye to a particular part of your outfit,
open with hands
Keep the steam off the bathroom mirror.
how do I make an envelope?
Learn while sleeping.
to Clean a Wooden Cutting Board with Lemon and Salt
To cut a coat hanger into a smaller piece to be used as a metal stem, you can
box
Eat watermelon with a mess.
To make hot fudge sauce
To coat rice krispie treats in chocolate, you can
mallet
To maintain the quality of an air mattress,
How should I finish a bouquet of flowers for a wedding?
How do I remove the pit of the cherries ?
handkerchief
To make a pina colada beverage,
how to make white chocolate fudge
never drop phone
To keep a pair of football shoes smelling fresh.
How to store beer in a fridge easily?
To fill the spanish bread with filling of your choice
To scoop batter into a cupcake pan for a recipe, you can
Remove gunk from glass bottle.
to get chicken hatching eggs
What's a good substitute for meat in a hamburger.
how to make hot tea toddy
how do you get ready to take a shower?
To ring out all the excess water from the cooked cauliflower
How do I fill the piping bag with the cookie mixture?
How can I organize fishing lures?
how to freeze soups without taking up a lot of space
How can I make a cool and minimalist hanger for my wall?
What if my gift card has only a little bit left on it, what can I do?
How to make Red Currant Syrup at home.
How can I open a can without a can opener?
How do I clean my car windows?
mouth
how do you steal an item?
How to do a push up.
To prepare for a security check at the airport,
To make mashed potatoes.
how do you stop being itchy?
how do you turn on a lawn mower?
To remove paint and stain from the top of a table, you can
Make an ice-pack that won't drip
How do you roll out polymer clay to make small clay sprinkles?
To make a foam box stay together, you can
tweezers
Enjoy your backyard wasp free
how do you let something rest?
How to join the wooden joints together.
To remove burrs from the side of a piece of acrylic, you can
To add the shaped dough to the heated dutch oven,
wash cloth
how to do a crochet stitch
Potato Cakes
how do you bomb a test?
how to get rid of ants
To make a smartphone holder out of household objects,
how to get extra flavor in grilled foods
Speak with a foreigner when traveling.
How do you grow a cranberry seedling in a container?
make a poached egg
How to remove white rings from wooden furniture?
chisel
how to prep grains for cooking
To even out a bowed stud in construction
how do you unmute the tv using the tv buttons?
TO keep your body hydrated,
How to combine leather to make a sheath?
bat
How to cut a bike gear?
how ot find the Lepus constellation
What can I use to make an old school walkie talkie?
I got hair dye on my clothes, so how can I get it out?
Increase fit for over sized wrench.
Catch a fish with a primative fishing rig.
How can I mount a poster in my bedroom wall?
To make breadcrumbs stick to fish, you can
to quickly untie knots
Increase shine of leather jacket.
To cook a steak using sous vide technique without any special equipment.
What can you put in your cereal if you can't have cows milk?
To prevent mice from entering your home,
Prevent brown sugar from getting hard.
Decorate power cords.
How to  make homemade lemonade.
Avoid late night food cravings.
What is a good alternative for a thick, sturdy, affordable bench top.
how do you favorite an email on yahoo?
How to Have a Good Relationship with Your Teacher
To dress safely for deep frying a turkey outside,
how to make a beet salad
How to cut cushion foam for couch cushion.
how to open a ream of paper.
Use common household ingredients to draw a perfect circle.
old shirt
When do you take the samples from the plants you want to graft?
How to cover stamp in ink.
To produce more juice from a lemon,
To remove corrosion from an old coin with household goods.
how to melt chocolate
Add waterproof layer to jacket.
What kind of fruit is needed?
How do I speak in third person?
How to use a paint roller.
To refresh your garbage disposal
How to eat a pizza
floor
Hide wires under office table.
To help your lawn be healthy and green,
make easy shortbread cookies
To prepare a cupcake tray to bake cupcakes in, you can
how do I make purple paint
How do I fill the phyllo dough when making baklava bites?
pumice
Clean up a microwave oven easily.
How do I keep the cords to my computer gear together?
washable paint
What can I use to start a fire without kindling?
One wants to make a new bag.
container
Pencils
make pinto beans
To cut batting into four inch squares, you can
Fall asleep easily.
To create a curvy pattern in a selection of wooden slats when they spin, you can
stick
To attach the socket on the light bulb sticking through a hole in the bucket.
can I make cheesecake quickly?
rolling pin
To stay in a foreign country cheaply,
How do I have a pillow fight
toilet tissue
To make a breakfast sandwich,
How do you feed hens?
What materials are needed to make a tyrannosaurus rex head?
Where to keep a kennel?
How can I turn my shiny lipstick into a matte lipstick?
How to hang a painting?
ice cream scoop
Keep cookies moist.
how do you kiss someone?
where do I find the Fornax consyellaiton
how to unstick postage stamps
How do you make a replacement lamp shade?
To fix loose screws in eyeglasses.
make celery juice
How can I clean a stapler before painting?
how to get rid of foam when cooking jam
To save your wrapping paper and keep it from rolling
How can you tell if you are interrupting someone's conversation in an unwanted way?
How do you select a birch tree to harvest bark from?
how do I make chicken juicier before roasting?
How to oil your hair clippers.
step-stool
two forks
How do I reinflate a flat bicycle tire?
What kind of bill should you use to be able to fold it into a tiny rectangle?
How to create mold of hand.
shoe box
To affix planks of wood securely together, you can
How do I get my hair to hold a curl?
How can I fix a phone or tablet that has its screen frozen?
To make a blueberry smoothie thick.
How to layout a future house plan on paper.
camera
To score an ace in tennis,
How to tell when egg whites have peaked enough when using a mixer.
how do you close a gas cap?
can
To memorize a speech for class,
How to contain fire pit.
To cool down your coffee without watering it down,
pitcher
Furniture blanket
how do I make pink paint
how do you frost a cake?
How to easily make an infinity dress versatile?
Create paper treat basket.
To stop coughing for quite a while,
To finish a wooden pallet so it is usable as a desk.
To thicken a mixture, you can
How to thwart security guards at a festival or concert and get liquor in.
pen
socket
To secure a wick to be used in a candle, you can
After baking cookies, before serving, you can
how to lighten freckles
How do you make the base for a Borg mask?
What would you store a DIY lotion bar in?
How do you make a donut bun with your hair?
what to do when i can't find meyer lemons
How to ensure icing settles properly on a cake?
To add a decorative and sweet topping to a blended coffee drink, you can
To remove dirt from a pallet before repurposing it, you can
how do you get rid of a pimple?
How to chill coconut water.
How could chicken be used for left over tacos?
Increase chances of someone returning a lost wallet.
What topping are best for homemade pizza?
To clean a laptop screen effectively.
To trim off excess fiberglass after casting it, you can
To stop the clock in a basketball game,
How to pickle vegetables
How can I remove old finish and dirt from wood?
How to freeze bananas for smoothies.
two forks
How do you clean clothes?
what is the formula for acceleration
coat hanger
how do you sit indian style?
How to make a simple wooden frame?
How to make whipped cream.
Store makeup brushes.
Remove make up smears from bathroom sink.
How do I make browned butter?
Pliers
Prevent mosquitoes at outdoor cookout.
How can I make sure a battery is still in good shape without testing it?
how to cook fresh pasta
To avoid a short circuit when trimming wires within a cord, it is important to
To attach positive and negative wires to a circuit board, you can
To safely break a glass window
For making an acrylic router base plate, what type of acrylic should I use?
how to be an extrovert?
How to hide the cord for a wall-mounted light?
To achieve fried chicken in a frying pan, you should
How can I save enough money in 2 months to fly anywhere in the world?
How can I make an extended magazine for a cosplay pistol?
To remove blood from clothing
How to make drill guide holes for a wood project.
how do you catch someone?
How can I clean a wine stain from my bed sheets quickly and easily?
making a Cat Scratching Pole.
How to apply cologne
When making scalded milk how do you know when to take it off the heat?
Make bread dough rise quickly
cardboard box
To melt beeswax, you can
How can I get my pizza to taste a little bit spicier?
How can I make a flour omelette spongier?
How to roast brussel sprouts
To pull a nail out of a board,
To prevent the cheesy jalapeno bread from sticking to the pan its cooked in
What should you do if she seems annoyed, or busy.
How do you open a clasp on a necklace?
Protect teeth from coffee stains.
To stay dry in a rainstorm,
To tell if your indoor plants need water
wok
bowl
Make petals for a fake rose.
To get your action figure lamp to stick to metal.
rubber band
How to make smores with homemade marshmallows.
To make a template for a sticker,
How do you clear water from a snorkel?
Save money at the gas station.
How many minutes are in an hour
Increase amount of focus.
To sleep well at night,
To finish off the top of the mac and cheese prior to baking
Score the bottles the same height
Make a piece of wood 1cm thick.
To make cardboard into more a curved shape, you can
To get the wrinkles out of a pair of pants before wearing them.
Keep food warm for tailgates.
Where can I get key copies made
When making a leather bracelet, what simple tool do you use to cut the leather?
How do you make clay?
To shorten the length of the grass in your lawn,
how to make a french ham and brie sandwich
how to not interrupt someone?
Make a chair for yard.
soda can
When shopping for apples, how do I know which ones to pick?
What is needed to melt the cheese for a pizza quesadilla?
To prevent bacteria getting on your hands after washing them,
how to roast cauliflower
How can you reduce a throbbing headache?
Reduce water use in dish washer.
To hold open a bedroom door without a door stopper.
strainer
When is the best time to aerate your lawn?
How to fix an armrest to a chair?
how do you know who wins a game of basketball?
What is the best way to eat a cupcake?
Replace the batteries in child's electronic keyboard.
How to strengthen arms.
To allow cream cheese to soften, you can
To feed ducks at the park safely,
To make frozen dough easier to cut, you can
To avoid getting juice on your cheeks when eating watermelon,
To get a strike in bowling,
Make a pot of tea.
What is an easy way to make a baby quilt without cutting a lot pieces to be sown together?
How to make a quick and simple bean bag?
how to separate egg whites and yolks
plate
Eat a food item to relax the mind.
pin
To play through Sonic Mania as Knuckles & Knuckles.
To keep a special bouquet of flowers fresher for longer.
Make a fun meal with hot dogs and spaghetti
To remove sharp edges off a cut Iron
Make sweeping a game for kids.
rag
How to choose your box and cut out main frame.
how to make towels stay absorbent
how do you make a folder on an iphone?
To hold the two halves of log together while keeping hiding place inside secret.
Reduce water use in laundry machine.
how often should I rinse pasta before serving?
To melt butter,
potato peeler
What can you use to cut the bandannas in half evenly?
how to remove a hard object in the toilet
Create giant lawn art canvas.
How to start a fight.
How to Turn a Gliding Car into a Flying Car
paper towels
To make a creamy pesto sauce.
how do you add more memory to an android phone?
tablecloth
how do you peel a fruit?
To pull those hard to get egg shell pieces out of the pan
Make a computer mailbox.
How to remove sticky residue from the deck.
how do you floss your teeth?
To place a poster into a frame.
How to Clear the Opening on a Spray Can
To get the proper texture on the cheese of a pizza,
How to make a page-holder protruding outside the book, without using any other materials?
How to cut a duck-tape on desired length?
To give wood a natural aged look, you can
how do you block a number on your phone?
To split a sheet of wood into two equal sections, you can
How do you coat strawberries in chocolate?
how do you show a surprised face
To protect much-used or oft-used pages in a reference book.
Identify properly stored ice cream before buying.
plastic wrap
what do you use to play kick ball?
chopsticks
How do you identify when to take a stem cutting from a gardenia plant?
To make sure an envelope doesn't go through machine sorting.
To deglaze a pan
To clean the litter box of your cat.
To make sure all the corners of a wooden board are at a 90 degree angle, you can
Can you paint with coffee?
How to make banana chips
a mop
To easily brush tangles out of curls,
How to make sure the ends of cut PVC pipe are smooth.
how to sanitize a toilet brush?
To cut mirrored acrylic.
sand paper
How to prepare film for use after storage?
stencil
how do you use a pellet stove?
To save money while running errands around town,
To smash cookies into small pieces without wasting a bag.
To secure a border marking cedar pole into the ground,
stapler
Entertain fidgety baby.
Keep moisture in fish.
how to remove excess grease from a cooked hamburger
How do you clean leaf lettuce?
glasses
How To Drink Coffee without Staining Your Teeth
How To Make a Crustless Custard Pie
What is a good affordable wedding gift to give someone?
water bottle
One wants to make a healthy fried food.
Refer to a specific page in a book or magazine quickly.
Start an automobile's engine.
rubber bands
To remove a stain off of white material,
How can I sterilize a wound?
To steep hibiscus flowers to make tea from.
How to make Peach Liqueur sauce at home.
How to cool down food in a spoon before eating it?
velcro
How do you set up a Nature Style Aquarium?
book
To avoid drowning if you're exhausted in the water,
Prevent dust buildup on air conditioning vent.
to give silver jewelry and accessories some shine
To remove sticker label of plastic pint container.
How do you use a zip tie?
To remove dry erase markers from a dry erase board,
To attach the eggs to the bird nest cookies after they have hardened
Make chocolate milk from scratch
Remove toilet clog.
What type of thread is best for making a macrame bracelet?
how do you recycle?
how do you hover over someone?
Make a monster killer for kids.
How to serve a tequila shot
Reduce inflammation of sun burn.
tupperware
towel
tissue
How to make a vodka and soda?
To cook a pie crust to perfection, you can
how to identify the first quarter moon phase
Paint
Make ice cream at home.
bird feeder
To mash the chickpeas for falafel.
How to keep thread from showing too much in a sewing project?
how do you cast a fishing line?
How quickly should I grind and polish the concrete when making a concrete countertop?
how to clean crumbs out of a toaster.
To prevent cake that's been sliced from getting stale.
statue
What's a good way to get a tag off of a sweater?
How to do planks properly at home.
How can I keep hair from getting in food while cooking?
ice pick
pitcher
How can I protect my teeth while drinking coffee?
To make a grilled cheese sandwich,
how to keep from getting gas with cooked beans
Talk to your family for free.
How to make a Long lasting Rootbeer slurpee float at home.
To scoop muffin dough into liners to be baked, you can
How can I cool down my home?
To organize your clothes in your closet
Make a yarn holder.
To make breadcrumbs
pin
Increase healthy soil for roses.
How to bend coat hanger wire for mini stove.
To play as  Super Sonic in the Classic Sonic games.
How long should I bake a strawberry rhubarb pie for ?
Make a strawberry into a rose shape.
To put on a new license plate.
how to make your own easter egg dyes
how do you open the trunk of a car with a key?
What can you do if you mess up on a voicemail?
Remove spider webs from ceilings.
How can I freshen my breath if I forgot to brush my teeth at home?
How to pick a ripe zucchini at the grocery store
How do I store the paint in my pocket watercolor set?
To get your hair to stay out of your face.
How can I silence a slamming screen door?
How can I stop smoking weed everyday?
how do you snap a twig?
To lose weight without doing much work,
To decorate a snowglobe while hiding the hot glue used to put to it together, you can
Avoid hair dye stains on neck.
How do you hang dress pants?
How to lock a door from the inside
how do you use a kcup machine?
To stay focused while working on an arduous task,
Filling pan
Keep colds away.
oil
Eliminate grime from faux flowers.
How to prevent a leather seat from being damaged by moisture?
Spread oil on cooking pan without leaving residue.
Prevent snails in garden.
How can you prevent Dehydration when out of doors?
How to make a bird house out of an old mailbox.
How can you keep cut flowers fresh longer?
Paint toenails.
Clean an egg shell
How do you attach Java Fern to wood?
When painting a house what do you need to do to it first?
How do I get rid of a toothache?
How do you pot a plant stem cutting?
How can I prevent an icy windshield in the winter?
how often to clean a coffee maker
To increase the gas mileage of your vehicle,
How to write on a white board.
Where can I watch a football game
How to hang lamp with slides on ceiling.
What supplies are needed to make a Mini Moai Statue?
how do I wash dishes at a camp site?
mouth
How to clean gold jewelry.
rings
To buckle a belt,
To stop a car without brakes,
How to glue inlays to neck of ukulele.
To prevent a light from coming in contact with food while using the light to dry the food, you can
If riced cauliflower is still raw after the initial cook time
gun
To prevent burning hands when lighting a candle,
How can I calculate how much water my plant will need during my vacation?
how do I harvest mint?
How do I make peanut butter and jelly cookie
fingernail
How to fix your phone charger
To make a s'moreo
To heat food more evenly in the microwave,
Where can I buy a table set for the dining room
pliers
What's a cool way to decorate and serve bottled drinks at a party?
How to reduce snoring at night.
how to make butter in a mason jar
how do you 'glow up'?
how do you remind someone of something?
how to prevent food from spinning while roasting
To attach no sew hem tape to a garment, you can
razor blade
How can you straighten kinked or uneven wire?
To score a strike in bowling,
To hit a volley in tennis,
What tools and parts are needed to make a candle from a glass bottle?
How to hang your mason jar light fixture?
Make a deli submarine sandwich.
Saute onions in a pan
To help remove indention on carpet left by furniture,
foil
pan
how do you capture someone?
How to store pearl jewelry pieces?
To cut a rod to length.
Add stability to arrow.
How can I use my keyboard if my keyboard stand is broken?
To get spare fabric to do a project with, you can
How do you fuse bungee cords together?
how do you snap your fingers?
How to cut a zucchini to make zucchini chips
when should I add a detergent pod?
How long to bake pumpkin cheesecake?
What's the last thing I should put on top of a caramel brownie pie?
To prepare garlic for baking, you can
How would I make the Italian dressing that I would use as seasoning on green bean bundles?
How to prevent stains from forming at a desk from drinks?
How to lower the volume on a TV with a remote
soap
shirt
How to build a corner desk for a room?
To prepare pot roast before adding it to a slow cooker.
How can you be sure you won't have a squeaky bad cart at the grocery store?
Make a snow fort
To prepare tomatoes for roasting,
Dry wet socks quickly.
how do you write a list?
someone's shoulders
shot glass
make a morse code drink
grater
How to make a frozen smoothie
What is the best temperature to cook meats at?
A lion hunter
How much does it cost to make a floating shelf?
Add shine to pottery.
To rough out the interior of a wooden bowl.
How do you make a candle?
lambourgini
how do you tell a bus when you want to get off?
to place ingredients for a bath bomb into a mold
How can I clean my blender?
Get food deals at movie cinemas.
How you save paint while painting?
Make a watering can.
Make homemade pizza with a tortilla.
how do you put charms on a charm bracelet?
To get toast out of a toaster,
how do you commit to someone?
To fold hand towels to where no edges show
how ot mkae strawberry milk
Clean your make up brushes.
To measure the length of a board,
how do you meditate?
To prepare a child to visit the dentist,
cereal box
If a blanket you've made is too fuzzy, to deal with this, you can
Prevent feet chafing.
how to adjust the consistency of pasta sauce
Make a chalkboard.
How to make the board look for attractive?
What can I keep fresh fruit in on the counter?
To secure the ends of a rope tied to a pole.
Pans
One is looking for an easy way to fire a crossbow.
milk jug
blanket
What can be recycled to make a DIY metal rose?
How to deter ants at a picnic?
clamp
A stove
how can I use dict tape to repair a hole?
wash cloth
To make your kitchen smell nice instantly.
To cut a specific angle in a piece of wood, you can
nail clipper
How do you secure your stencil onto the glass?
To prepare the base of a rainbow cheesecake,
Easy way to fall asleep in a noisy environment
What to use to water plants in a garden?
how do you use the sauce at taco bell?
How can I heat food evenly in the microwave?
How to Relax
What chemical can you use to make red flames in a fire?
Reduce pour of rubbing alcohol.
How to Cut Out Pattern To Make BiFold Wallet
axe
To cook onions and beef at the same time, you can
To remove excess glue,
To create a triangle in a dollar bill
How do I clean the raspberries when making raspberry bark?
Increase wrinkle free condition of clothes.
If I don't have a measuring tape, how can I measure my hands to make duct tape gloves?
When should I pick my tomato plants off the vine?
how do you comb hair?
how do you look for prime shipping only items on amazon?
How to fold bottle cap crease.
How can I get dust out of my speakers?
To chop an avocado in half,
How to make jeans look unique?
how to remove pen marks
how to keep your pipes from freezing in the winter
How to make home-made butter.
How do you properly start carving a turkey?
To make a life sized edible skull with a mold, the best base for the skull is what?
How to prevent a nail from growing into skin?
Remove tea stain from mug.
How do you get rid of poison ivy rash?
How can I make a cell phone holder that will keep my phone off the floor while it charges (for free)?
watering can
To pick up dog poop without having to touch it.
how do you use an extension cord?
how do you curl a strand of ribbon?
How to serve a whiskey on the rocks
What type of oil should be used to fry Crispy Nendran Banana Chips.
How to make a sugar face scrub.
How to Cut Slabs of Marble to Make Marble and Stainless Steel Planters
How can I easily paint polka dots on things?
Adding the pictures to bottle caps
Test heat of frying pan.
How do you make jello?
how do you wear a watch?
Restore fluffiness of pillows.
how do you update an iphone x?
Neutralize odor in trash bin.
To help your grass receive more oxygen and nutrient,
To make homemade bread come out soft and chewy,
Superglue
ice cupcakes with canned frosting
paintbrush
How can I get the pilling off a sweater?
How do I sear salmon?
How to ensure airflow through a window?
What do you need to grow an avocado tree?
What supplies are needed to make a vinyl record bowl?
To unsure even pieces of tortilla dough
To restore dried out paint brushes
To sell your book well,
How do I make swirled marshmallow lollipops with a bag full of frosting?
To prevent ants in your kitchen,
How do you dispose of grease?
Create a garden shovel.
Hold bobby pins.
mittens
Make coconut fat bombs
Take back sent email.
how do you travel across the sea?
hands
How to make a chocolate Meringue pie at home.
How to prevent your garden producing stubby carrots?
Easy Pyrography Ornaments
How do you wash ginger root?
Retract an ummbrella.
How do you apply oil finish to wood?
in order to connect two pieces of land separated by water,
air conditioner
How to make garlic last longer?
How do you address an envelope?
how do I grill steak?
throw
which salt to cook with
To cook dough into a satisfying, delicious bread, you can
To make coffee taste less bold.
How to cut wires?
plate
Keep keys secure when dancing.
whiten clothes without bleach
To swap between Super NES, Nintendo 64, and Game Cube audio/video cables.
how do you clammer something?
To de-ice your car without scraping it.
How to decrystallize honey?
How do you put on a pillow case?
How do you wash a dirty plate?
How to make 1 gallon of  sun tea.
To melt the marshmallows for the marshmallow jello fondant
how to change name on facebook
wrapper
hair clip
How do you make a snow angel?
To perform an angled cut in a piece of wood, you can
Learn how to make the base of a miniature donut.
To split a wooden log in half, you can
Treat a painful headache.
How can I dye white fabric to look old?
hose
straw
To substitute helium for balloons,
Keeping a healthy sleep routine
How to glue two pieces of wood together.
wedge
To remove price tag stickers
Repair a glass window frame.
rehydrate a vanilla pod
How do I marinate the fillets for easy baked salmon?
Avoid diaper rash on baby.
pan
how to grow a vegetable?
Make a colored pencil case.
To make kale more edible,
How do you use a clothespin?
To grind pods of vegetation into a fine powder, you can
lipstick
How can I attach tomato plants to stakes in the garden?
wash your comforter
two forks
How to make the roof of you birdhouse?
How do you turn up the volume on a computer?
Apply even coat of paint to spray foam once it is dry.
How do I scoop out ice cream into perfect balls?
make earrings
How do you do a three point turn?
Secure tent from wind.
fluff pillows in a dryer
How do I find a youtubers page
how do you chew on something?
To roll out and butter dough.
to keep the bugs away from a camp fire
To prevent  the ends of the cord from fraying,
How to drive in a school zone?
To protect heads of razors
To protect wire that has become damaged, you can
To unwrap a sucker
To make cream cheese easily spreadable, you can
What materials do you need to make an Assassin's Creed Hidden Blade?
To make hard boiled eggs
Strain butter from a shaken butter milk jar
What can i use to start a fire fast if I cant find kindeling?
Avoid slips in kitchen.
hammer
Prevent ice from forming on wiper blades.
How to clean a smoking pipe.
To get a barber to give you the right hair cut every time,
To cut an eggshell in half
How to Make a Low Carb Barbecue Sauce
How to Make Best Easy Banana Bread
How do you organize your DVDs?
flower fragrance
To apply elastic roofing coating.
How to Fill A Lost Glove Owl
How to secure a pendant to a chain.
How to apply stain to bone.
how do I take a shot of tequila the right way
How to Keep Your Resume to One Page
How do you clean shoelaces on sneakers?
In order to use a cooler as a piece of furniture,
How do I pin fur to prepare it for sewing?
hammer
What should I do first when making a seed starter from newspaper?
how do you sign up for facebook?
To entertain yourself on a long run,
To get a slam dunk in basketball,
To stop a cat from scratching furniture.
How to make perfectly circular holes in paper.
To get rid of dark, under eye circles.
How to preserve flowers.
How to make wood chips smoke for longer?
how to make a spicy peanut butter-banana sandwich
To seal metal fixtures after removing tarnish and rust,
Heal a sunburn.
How can I remove a nail or screw that is bent into a wall or surface, and can no longer be hammered in?
how do you put gauges in your ear?
Cut potatoes up to make french fries.
To label the compartments of egg carton storage box.
how do you cancel something?
Sanitize computer keyboard.
When should I add my egg to the pan before frying it?
How to report spam on gmail
pillowcase
To find out how long to cook banana bunt bread.
Attach the shower curtain to the rings
ho emuch energy does a photon have
how do you open a microwave?
marker
To get sweat stains out of clothing when washing them,
How do you kill ticks on a dog?
Make a hair dryer holder.
how to make strawberry-rhubarb toast
kerchief
How to make Rice Krispie treats.
Make a fake beard.
internet
How to sharpen the end of a stick to a point.
Plant a flower in your garden.
Prevent sand on phone at the beach.
how to make popsicles with koolaid
How do you use a rock tumbler to make faux sea glass out of the shards of glass?
how to get a decorative pie crust?
How to inspect electrical outlets.
net
How can you keep birds from perching on and soiling your car?
Prevent hang nails.
how do you add glitter to paper?
To clean a dirty window
How to win Sudoku
How to make chinese fried rice
Create a privacy screen in shared room.
To save money on gas,
towel
What is the best way to paint a door
how do I make basil pesto?
How to freshen your shoes cheaply.
Where can I learn to play the flute
How to roast the pumpkin seeds from a pumpkin?
To hide that the small holes in a craft are hollow, you can
How do you fix a broken nail?
How can you reduce swelling under your eyes at home?
glass jar
how do you clean sticky hands?
Avoid advertisements in mobile games.
Eating a healthy diet
To put a paper on a pumpkin to use as a design you should use
Identify a rotten avocado.
Ride a bicycle.
Keep bugs away from sandbox.
One seeks to be able to throw their knife.
To clean away the excess plastic from the edge of a project, you can
How to use your DIY textured stamps?
how do you start a microwave?
What is the best way to tell someone that they need to use deodorant?
How do you roll the dough for Limoncello Pie?
Calculate a tip for a bartender.
How to store leftover cake
how do you return a hit quickly on mturk?
How do you sharpen a knife in a rural area?
Can I freeze coconut oil?
How to weave a belt.
Increase ease of morning routine.
How to measure current in a dc circuit?
How to solder
nails
How do I cut aluminium when making industrial picture frames?
How can you rapidly cool a canned drink?
To mix nutella and cream to make ice cream
To make finishing a big day of chores more fun for your family,
To draw out a pattern on fabric to embroider
how do you release your sinuses?
how to store a mango
To glaze the pie,
How can ropes be used for climbing trees?
To maintain a sharp shaving blade for longer,
how do i unscrew a rusted screw?
Using the air pump
When making bacon pancakes, when do I add the bacon?
To keep meatballs from falling apart when cooking them,
To quickly put even holes into card stock.
How to create custom sitckers are home.
How do you cite internet sources?
Applying varnish, paint, or seal your structure.
To attach the seed bead flower ornament to the necklace.
piece of fruit
penny
How to open a soda bottle
To attach the LED to the Tiny 9V Clip Flashlight
protractor
How should I cut the bottom of a paper tube so that it is flat?
Easily fish out herbs with tough stems from broth.
How to make Lavender Beeswax Candles at home.
To mix eggs, oil, and grapefruit juice together, you can
How to Deal with Getting Fired for No Reason
vinegar
How to tie shirt for tie dying.
To prepare the iron for frying,
To keep plague doctor's from breathing "bad" air during the plague.
How long should you let resin dry?
how do I rehydrate dried tomatoes?
How can you do sit ups without straining your neck?
how do you use mouthwash?
How do you re-post a story on Instagram?
To flip a funfetti pancake in a pan
How can I keep from dropping metal screws and nails and nuts when on a ladder?
To fix a broken plate.
how to make Homestyle Pancake Mix
Build a sand castle.
stick
To plan halloween makeup
To begin making a dough, you can
To keep table cloths wrinkle free after washing them.
napkins
How to save some shower water for gardening?
To secure the grommets together tightly
how do you react to a message on facebook?
Attach the tissue paper to the raindrop shaped pieces
how do you sign out of the netflix app?
To prevent pie crust from sticking to a piece of baking cloth, you can
To make cinnamon waffles easily without any hassle,
mixer
To make sails for a tetrahedral kite
how to thicken a milkshake
To put out a campfire,
To make strawberries less sour,
Remove wrinkles from clothes without iron.
how do you search for a specific photo on the photos app on iphone?
How to make pie crust at home from 4 ingredients.
skillet
food processor
To add dirt to the pot in the flower pot necklace.
How to make your own DIY Flying Fish
what is a right angle
Open a jelly jar that is stuck shut using a rubber band.
pickaxe
how do you drive home if you have a flat tire?
how to make german potato salad
To loosen up the pumpkin guts for juicing.
How to make a simple window seat in a bedroom?
To create a simple papier mache paste,
How To make Dough for Easy Flatbread
To safe money on hand soap use.
How do I start a dirt bike
To open a locked door where the deadbolt is not locked,
How can I make a cool mail holder, cheaply?
Combine gelatin powder and water.
What is it called when you clear 4 lines at once in tetris?
How to Grow Sunflowers
To make a Jack-O-Lantern appear more spooky,
To figure out how long it takes to dye a shirt with bleach
How do you catch real snow flakes?
Do cardio exercise without running.
To prepare a pan to bake bread in it, you can
What is the best way to store honey for it to last the longest?
Recycle your toilet paper rolls.
Remove ketchup stain from clothes.
How to pierce mason jar lid.
how do you crack an egg?
To cut pieces of metal to size, you can
How do you make DIY Root Fertilizer Tabs for Planted Aquariums?
To get rid of printed material on cardboard boxes like cereal boxes.
how do you serve someone dinner?
To teach children about folk heroes in America,
sock
air bubble
How do you screw in a screw?
how to stop kebabs from spinning on a grill
make dressing with hazelnuts
To push the stem out of a strawberry with ease,
chopsticks
mirror
how to repel fleas
how do you scrap metal?
How to make Kumquat Marmalade Sauce at home.
What wood materials do I need?
To win the 100 meter dash,
To attach fabric together to make a garment, you can
How can you keep Macaroni and cheese from getting hard when you reheat it?
how to make great eggs
counter top
How do you polish brass?
What's a good way to organize baking pans in a small kitchen?
How to make a simple headpiece to wear in your hair?
How do I stop the duct tape end from disappearing?
To take a screenshot of a PC screen.
To make a funnel when you don't have one.
Heal sore hands.
Reduce gas use on stove.
how do you roll your eyes?
How often should you clean your piercing when it is healing?
Create a work excuse.
Fill up the market ink cartridge.
To peel an orange with your hands,
How to ensure you don't lose your guitar pick?
To prepare a peach for peach lemon popsicles.
How to make a Fried Cherry Pie on your stovetop.
To prepare a truck for sandblasting.
how to flush the toilet when the water is off
Remove wrinkles faster.
how do you fry an egg?
To paint in a stenciled design on a wall,
Remove hardened glue from the glue lid
How can I edge my lawn without an edger?
how do you branch something out?
file
To put the cut wood together to make the tray
grater
machines
how to ensure your oven is at the right temperature
What can I use to make a silk screen pattern?
How do I close the mooncakes when I've rolled the read bean paste filling into them?
How do I seal off an area of my home to contain dust while remodeling?
How to remove smells from a musty basement or other lingering odors.
For a homemade water balloon pump
To remove the outer layer from bamboo, you can
Make apple and peanut butter sandwiches without bread.
how do you use a dust pan?
How to clean a PVC product?
Easily peel off egg shells.
How to put holes in leather.
how do you take a bandaid off?
Add shine to metal furniture.
To make a magnetic clasp for the wooden wallet,
What materials and tools are needed to make mud mirror art?
How can you stop crying while you chop onions?
To seal the edges of a cut in fabric, you can
To pour concrete into a mold.
how do you use bluetooth on an iphone?
pants
Prevent house rodents.
How do you attach a camera to a tripod?
How can I help keep my house cooler in the summer time?
To make lemonade out of raw lemons,
medicine cabinet
to dry shoelaces after soaking
Where should you shelter in a thunderstorm?
Keep your glasses from fogging
Cool room interior.
How to make easy makeshift earrings?
How to make money when recycling?
To unclutter your closets,
T prevent the hot melted chocolate from cooking the eggs when adding them to the melted chocolate
How can I remove grime from my shoes and soles of shoes?
Organize game pieces.
To crack the shell of a lobster without a lobster cracker,
How do you make Almond Milk?
To make pumpkin spice granola
To ensure that breading will stick to chicken, you can
How to strip a floppy disk.
lemon
floor
Make a saw blade guard.
How can I get rid of old stains in a ceiling?
how do you keep from getting cavities?
How can you teach your dog to do tricks?
How can I use a milk jug for a planter?
Restore brightness of copper.
Make a ponytail.
how do you keep betas from fighting?
To walk easily through thick snow,
Before blow drying your hair
To strengthen the edges of a folder cardboard project, you can
To clean copper, you can
t-shirt
How to add Jello to the top layer of strawberries in a Jello fruit salad.
how do you avoid being pulled over by a cop?
To fix a stuck SNES controller button.
To attach feathers to a dream catcher, you can
How do I draw villages on a map?
To punish children
How can I make leather pliable?
how do you pick a flower?
How to set the table.
how to show you are unhappy?
To remove crud from holes in a chainsaw
how do you check how long ago a friend was at a known location on find my friends?
How do you soften wine corks?
smartphone
To mix the canned cherries in with the cake mix,
To make cheese melt faster in a frying pan, you can
How to make latkes
tomato
earth
Prevent the cake from getting stale
Buns
How can you reduce your acne?
How can I cover an open can in the refrigerator?
Cut strips in the t-shirt to make a braid.
how do you continue something?
how do you contour makeup?
To mix butter and corn syrup together, you can
How to mount a guitar against a wall?
How do I remove a door from its hinges?
To seal off a bag of opened chips, you can easily craft a chip clip by
If you want to reuse a small jar as a refrigerator magnet, what do you need to do?
how do you condone something?
how do you wear a pad?
How do I smooth the iron bar ?
How should you act if bitten by a Shark in the ocean?
To hammer a nail into a board,
vise grip
How can you lose weight?
To secure wicks to the bottom of jars so they are stable while pouring wax candles.
how do you bump something?
how to make a turkey with everything hummus sandwich
How to keep a shower curtain from flapping out when showering?
Make a tool rack.
How to check your car tire's tread condition with a penny.
How do you grill hamburger buns?
coat hanger
How to process the ratios to make your own Gatorade?
metal bucket
Add contents of vanilla bean to pan.
How should you reattach the bowl for the stand mixer?
To hang curtains, you can
proper consistency of concrete for a mould
How to build wings for a Soda Can Vibrating Bug
How can I eat chinese take out without getting a paper plate or eating out of the package directly?
To protect your iphone properly.
pan
To put a perfect hole in the lid of a jug, you can
nail clipper
how do you get rid of weeds in a yard?
massager
Plant grass seed.
mop bucket
To decrease the amount of saturated and transaturated fats you are consuming,
Purge fat from stew.
Where do you find the material to make a 2 cm by 10 cm strip of plastic?
silverware
Make a mail holder out of a shutter.
What size of wheels should be used on a barn door?
Take out blood stain from coffee table.
How can I make a hammock resistant to rain?
To clean suede boots without destroying the texture,
gun
How to speed up the drying of wet shoes.
What is the best time to dumpster dive?
To prep the jalapenos for stuffing.
To add a sweet touch to a blended drink
pitcher
fork
how do you articulate words?
how to make cottage cheese last longer
toilet tissue
To weaken the fibers in a wood
To stop a child from disobeying you,
To add beads to thread.
How do you make orange juice with a juicer?
To connect two pieces of wire together in a lamp, you can
To cool a mixture, you can
ow do you give a dog a pill?
How to clean inside of toilet bowl
How do I staple pieces of paper together?
Clean concrete stains.
How can you survive if you are stuck in quicksand?
How to use a power bank
How can I get into things I don't know about
How do you make applesauce taste better?
How to childproof a lounge area?
keep blanched vegetables from losing thier color.
To remove old, dried paint from a paint well, you can
To get rid of a bruise fast.
To flatten a bottle cap to be cut to use as a key.
How to finish your sling after you finished braiding?
To sew a fake mustache onto  a fake beard,
How to create a wedding guest list
bin
To open a letter very neatly without ruining the envelope when you don't have a letter opener,
how to make rocky road bark
How can I shave my face without shaving cream?
bin
What do you need to make slime?
How do I caramelize nuts to eat with a nutella mousse?
how do you lift weights?
Sandwich
how do you play hide and seek?
make charcoal
ice pick
How do I create the window effect on the tardis?
to sore your cleaning supplies
How do you choose a pair of shoes?
What is needed to make legs for a DIY wooden table?
piece of wood
how do you stop a dog from having puppies?
How can you find out what someone really wants for their gift?
How do I shovel snow and not hurt my back?
how do you eat an ice cream cone?
Treat a headache with natural remedy.
Prevent groceries from spilling in trunk.
Banana exfoliating scrub
How do you register to vote?
To start a campfire,
To personalise keys.
How do I clean the door of my garage?
razor blade
mesh netting
how do you control something?
How much cardboard would I need to make a pinhole camera?
What shapes would be used to create a large scale 20-sided die?
How do you line of the position of the brackets for a retractable window awning?
How do you cut styrofoam?
how do you divide something?
To free yourself from a riptide,
how do you show you've done a lap on the stopwatch feature?
Remove eye makeup from sensitive skin.
perfectly cut potatoe wedges
how do you breathe in?
rake
soap
To help focus an eye that usually requires glasses,
To create modeling chocolate.
To lighten skin naturally
Etch a label onto a glass bottle.
soda can
Cutting an avocado and removing the pit.
Ran out of fish food.
post hole digger
Install a holder for cooking pot lids.
stove
Add fluff to blankets.
What can I do to insulate the tin can so it won't burns my hand when I carry the embers ?
How can I set my manual clock to daylight savings time?
Make edible face mask.
To clean an AR-15 chamber
baby wipe
Painting survival containor.
To make sure brackets are straight on a wall, you can
bobby pin
To protect your electronics.
apples
how to clean your microwave
how do you start the shuffle on music?
What ingredients do you need to make Peanut Butter Fudge?
How can you prevent yourself from losing your keys?
To relieve a burning sore throat.
To groom a dog's eyes and get rid of the nasty glued together hair where the tear ducts have been running,
How can I reduce exposure to Mosquitoes?
Avoid fog on your windshield.
Should I add nuts to a cookie I am taking to a party?
To attach wires together permanently after bending them into a certain configuration, you can
To color easter eggs,
How to best water an indoor plant?
To decide whether to discard dark cooking oil,
How many treats can I give my dog per day?
How to charge cell phone
How to pack away belts and ties in a suitcase?
How to end threaded knot.
How to make Thai iced tea.
What can I store my stamp collection in?
how to find tyhe perimeter of a parellolgram
Heal skin irritation.
How can I dip a cord in wax without getting it on my fingers?
Sand
To clean tar off of a concrete surface,
How do you get dirt off of shoes?
To protect floors from scratches and scrapes.
How do you oxidize your copper ring?
How can you make yourself look more natural in a photo?
How to add balls to box.
How do I take a pill
how to boost mood instantly
Keeping car doors from freezing shut in winters
How to relieve poison ivy itching?
how do you use the at symbol on a laptop keyboard?
Peppermint
To make a DIY trail mix,
To bake a potato,
To weight down a balloon at a party,
How many acres is one hectare?
How to cut the end of a sparkler.
To sweeten the keto pancakes
How do you zoom in on a Mac computer?
Cookies
how do you take care of an itch?
pots and pans
How can you get the freshest food at your grocery store?
To pain a wooden beam,
Choosing the size of the workbench
To dry soaking wet shoes.
How to tell if a cup is cracked on the bottom.
Make your books look organized and seemingly free-standing with book-ends.
how to avoid mascara marks
To secure the cabin foundation posts in the ground.
how do you picnic somewhere?
how do you put a screen protector on your phone?
To add a spicy flavor to some grilled chicken.
Quench thirst without liquids.
Mark liquid levels in a bottle.
To determine the proper size for homemade booties, you can
How to quickly clean white sneakers without machine washing?
sand paper
To store the nutella cookies
To apply upholstery to a wooden bench, you can
What should I use to fold a dollar bill into a paper heart?
open a wine bottle
Prevent plunger grime on bathroom floor.
What is the best way to clean your cell phone?
cement
How to Finish Easy Onion Rings
how do you get fitted for an outfit?
How can I cut a sheet of brass?
coat chicken with crushed nuts
To put a clear coat on a wooden box.
To sand down the wooden board to a smooth finish.
How do you break champagne bottles safely in order to use the shards to make faux sea glass?
vise grip
Avoid losing contact lenses during shower.
How to make a turkey sandwich.
How many wheels does a car have
Treat sore throat with food.
Frying the chips
Finding the perfect sized bottle to put the seeds in so that there is enough room.
To connect pieces of cardboard together without glue or tape.
chalk
mouth
Vinegar
How do I start a car?
how do you clean your ear?
How do you drill into a counter?
how do you play volleyball?
How do you know that a shirt qualifies as a tunic?
When making a leather bracelet how do you make symbols on your bracelet?
how do you turn off 'do not disturb' on an iphone?
How to dry wet clothes.
To clean stains out of clothes.
How to make a very good ice cream sundae.
vacuum
To make Buddha shaped pears.
how to make banana and peanut butter sandwhich
To keep hair dye from staining your skin.
How can I remove smoke from a room?
How to strain water from pasta
To cut a steel tube down to length, you can
Bulldozer
To cut lengths of wire to use for jewelry making,
how do you show you liked a play?
How do you make egg salad?
Recycle a light bulb as an oil lamp.
What can I do with eggshells?
lunches
How do you detect varroa mites in your honeybee colony’s bee box?
To shrink a piece of paracord, you can
How long do you cook the candied cucumber?
how do you empty a queue on mturk?
How can I make wood filler at home?
how do you deal cards in poker?
how do you clean floors>
To get materials for a paracord chair.
How do you collect snowflakes?
How do I make the color purple
How can I ease my mind and make sure I DID remember to lock my door and turn off my oven when leaving for a long trip?
how to make white chocolate-peppermint bark
How to Desalinate Seawater
Make a small bird feeder.
Freshen up stale tortilla chips.
Remove burnt food from cooking pot.
how to make holiday party mix
How do you trim brussel sprouts?
how do you show you're engaged, with jewelry?
To clean dirty shower heads and faucets.
Remove pet hair from jeans.
How do you make a fake tube of plutonium prop?
To give paper crafts a 3d effect, you can
bucket
How can I make my cups zombie themed for a party?
How to Prepare for a Wedding
how to clean a garage floor
How to Prepare Pound Cake Mix to Make Homemade Twinkies
To help soften a corn tortilla without many dishes,
mirror
Charge smartphone faster.
How can you clean underneath fingernails?
Make coffee flavored steak.
how do you erase chalk from the sidewalk?
groomers
safely clean dirty light bulbs
newspaper
how do you steer a car?
How to ride a horse.
How do you organize your house keys?
how do you favorite a song on spotify?
Keep lunch box cool.
How do I extinguish a fire
To ensure wooden pallet planks will be able to handle the summer sun.
To melt butter for a recipe, you can
how do you use a gravity dog feeder?
To easily add butterscotch chips to cupcake batter.
To reduce chances of getting diabetes,
How to synchronize the subtitles with the video on VLC media player
Seal zip lock bag.
How to make a automatic fish feeder?
To attach batting to fabric, you can
What kind of container can you use to brew Rhubarb - Champagne yourself at home?
how do you splurge on something?
Decorate a Christmas tree.
how do you punt a football?
Sharpen dull scissors.
how do you get rid of chicken pox?
water bottle
To search for items in YouTube.
earring
How to remove dust off an old book?
how to make rutabega with wheatberries
What is the best shape for a star?
how do you name a baby?
To get rid of spiders.
television
Learn what materials I need to make a small cardboard animal maze.
Practice your soccer shooting skills.
How thin should I cut the mushrooms when making beef and bourbon pie?
To quickly warm up your room,
Let Your Map App Lead You Back to Your Parked Car
Choosing the right whole grains for a healthy diet
How can you get an extra hand while wood-working?
The best kind of tool to handle in the workshop
How to peel the skin off and apple?
What kind of bullets should be used on a pistol?
oil
How to remove dog ears which form on pages of books?
Keep a birdbath filled with water.
a padded fist
To  unlock the last story in Sonic Adventure 2.
Aid food digestion.
Keeping your tomatoes fresh longer
To prepare carrots for cooking.
paperclip
To start the duct tape woven purse
To allow a cake to set, you can
blade
To make a seam completely flat before sewing it, you can
Secure fragile items.
How can you determine the quality of your soil for gardening purposes?
To hold webbing together while you sew it.
How do I patch up holes in vinyl wall art after I've put up my design?
To insert AA batteries into a remote.
To create a roux, you can
Store spices for camping.
To save electric in the summer,
How to put out a candle in a jar?
How can I get money from "Naked Juice"?
How to stop wet suit zipper from getting jammed.
How can I punch holes in a leather strap?
Buy freshest bag lettuce.
How to feed a pet fish
To make frozen ground beef easier to thaw
what to substitute for hamburger, for a veggie burger
How to eat a peach
How can I check for gas leaks in pipes?
To prevent an antique fixture from oxidizing after cleaning
How can you soften dried Play-Doh?
How to fill a wood stove.
To add a slight curve to the top of a box, you can
How to make Salmon Berry Syrup for Pancakes at home.
how do you listen to others?
How to remove scratches from glass.
How can I attach LED lights to paperclips?
how to freeze pureed avocados
To cool down a batch of cookies that you just baked in the oven?
How do I finish the mooncakes after they come out of the oven when making mooncakes at home?
tissues
How to prepare a pear for a pear pie?
how to say hello nonverbally?
box cutter
torch
open a tube of toothpaste
how do you trickle water?
how to remove water spots from granite
Sleep in car while drunk without breaking law.
How to protect your eyes while using woodworking tools.
What's the best way to start cutting pieces for 15 plywood duck boxes?
Keep study flash cards organized.
To put holes in the bottom of a yogurt container to make a great seed starter
To attach the MDF backing to a bookcase that looks like a dollhouse.
How to signal a cab to stop?
how do I get a ring off myfinger that is stuck?
cement
To store old granola that you won't be using for a while.
To clean up the wood shavings created by CNC woodworking machine.
To get a template to stick to wood, you can
What is the best paint for stencils?
Storing silverware for picnics.
refrigerator
How to clean a blender.
board
Make several batches of cookies at once.
how to give yourself a steam treatment
How to use a rock as an anchor?
How do I spray with polyurethane?
blanket
how do you put a dvd in a dvd player?
how do you poke someone on facebook?
If you mess up a voicemail to someone
How to prevent dog's paws from hurting from snow?
To make a recipe spicier when cooking with peppers, you can
pliers
How to keep wood skewers from burning on the grill.
To ensure a piece of wood in a project is durable, you can
How do I make the walls of my handmade foam mausoleum look weathered?
How to insert knobs on drawers.
To make flaxseeds more easily digestible.
Keep your washing machine clean smelling
Who invented the franklin library chair?
How to increase protein gains.
How to mix a carton of juice before serving it
overnight oats without nut butters
To stop ads from popping up on smart phone games for free,
Make pet treats.
how do you use barbecue sauce for chicken nuggets?
How to clean out earwax.
how to keep your cutting board from sliding
To get a rebound in a basketball game,
If you want discounted pizza how can you save money?
To get a nice BBQ color on a smoked piece of meat,
Keep bugs away from garden.
To avoid making paper mache helmet fit too tightly after modeling it to your head size.
how to keep sweet potatoes from turning dingy
How can you decorate your junk mail letter opener?
To spread glue evenly in a dowel pin hole.
Keep wasps away from picnic.
how do you sign in to your email?
To encourage a baby in the womb to kick more,
Open a cardboard box that has been taped shut.
how to naturally soften your clothes
How do you air dry a sweater inside?
Remove tough jar lid without straining wrists.
To make vegetable salad tastier.
How to Be a Good Prom Date
How to open a tab again that was recently closed,
How to cut tree stump in half.
What are some things I can grow that might repel mosquitoes?
Keep legs moisturized after shaving.
To shuffle cards.
roast a jalapeno pepper
siphon
make a soft boiled agg
How can I attach a spoon to a jar for body scrub?
how to save on chicken breasts
how do you find a synonym of a word?
To easily keep cables separated from each other,
How to scratch an itch
To absorb extra salt that has been added to a dish,
To oil a baking tray,
How to Make a Hardcover Book Christmas Tree
How to Make a LED Parachute
To get ready to knit your first project.
a robot
To attach the art pieces to the background so they look 3D.
To wipe off the residue from a label,
Prevent injuries at camp site.
How can I get rid of a cough?
Cheat during an exam.
How do I update my resume
Remove hair from dog deshedder tool.
To attach lead wires to LEDs, you can
How to you make a pattern of your shoes?
How do I remove whipped cream from the side of a cake if it falls off?
Remove broken light bulb without getting cut.
glue stones to another rock
how to make grain-cabbage gratin
How do you cook rice?
How to make jalapenos bacon wrap.
Clean a desk top.
how do you complete something?
tiny vase 
how do you claw at someone?
How to wash your dog.
To make a groove in a length of plastic pipe, you can
Prepare a miter saw to cut wood
Remove paint from a mirror
How to cross a busy road?
For an upside down tomato planter
How to unclog hair out of a bathroom sink?
fire
What can be used if you don't have the right size pipe clamp?
How can I be tidy when painting?
How to make raspberry cloud cups
How do you keep stink bugs out of your house?
How to teach a child to draw letters?
Are self car washes open 24 hours?
How to Lose 10 Pounds in 10 Days
Make Basil Garlic Aioli
hands
how to get rid of acne
How to make holes on milk bottle cap.
how to clean stovetop drip bowls
Balance the checkbook
Speed up healing of cold sore.
Increase chances of losing weight.
How to Make a Snowy Paper Christmas Tree
how do you dispose of something?
How to put on deodorant
clean white shoes
How do I flatten patties when making hamburgers from scratch
tube
Increase ability of lotion to treat sunburn.
How do you freeze bananas?
Mix the concrete for concrete slab.
To Clean vegetables.
To waterproof your shoes using items around the house
how to make eggnog truffles
To melt wax down for a candle
pin
nail clipper
how to sharpen a crayon
How can you hold a door on edge?
How do you hang up a paper plate skeleton?
What is the best month to see Cassiopeia constellation?
To cream together sugar and butter
how do you use fly trap tape?
To prepare ginger for Golden Milk recipe.
To make a Blind Russian cocktail
Make ear plugs.
how do you use a straw to drink a beverage?
How do you stretch out jeans?
To calculate 3 point shooting percentage in basketball,
Create a makeup brush holder out of a Pringles can.
How do I make the mask stay on my head?
How can I undo a spelling mistake I did with pencil by hand?
Making a design for your wallet.
How can I get rid of the barcode stickers that come on items?
To clean a floor,
How to make Chocolate Covered Banana Chip Fantasy fudge at home.
what is the formula for solving a trapezoid
What do you need to wash the outside of a car?
Make a trash compactor.
Sand a table Top Flat
How do you attach a flag to a pole?
How to make croutons
how do you make donut holes?
How to make Wintergreen Ice cream at home.
how do you win at where's waldo>
How do I refill a foaming hand-soap container with regular liquid soap?
How do you program a robot?
Make a bird's nest.
Does carbonated water help garden plants ?
how do you irigate your ear?
To boil condensed milk, you can
To dry nail polish fast.
t-shirt
How to check if your deoderant is working
Pick a spot with at least 6 feet of space from ground to hanging point.
How do I get grease off my garage floor?
Make two 3 inch slits into a wood block
To make French fries,
how to add calcium to your plants
Split fire wood.
To efficiently join pieces of wood together, you can
To do a belly flop into a pool
how to tame bitterness in iced tea
When working with spray paint, it is important to
To get permanent marker off of walls.
how do you win at the silent game?
how do you breathe in?
How do I bleed an oil heater line?
how do you clean nail polish off of your nails?
what is the best deal on chicken
To cook a steak medium,
To get pencil drawings to not smear,
how to make fire starters
how do you wear fake nails?
how do you refresh the page on your yahoo app?
To cook bacon to crumble for a recipe.
Clean computer screen
keep celery crisp
How can you tell if a friend if upset with you?
What will help me repel spiders and mites in my house?
how do you pour liquid?
To cut metal rods into two same sizes.
clamp
What tools are needed to build a PVC irrigation network?
How to remove a wine stain from your wooden dining room table.
To create a Yahoo account
wrapper
glass
how to prevent eyes watering when cutting onions
To open a goldfish box.
Clean the fan blades.
How to parallel park.
How do I know if meringue is mixed properly?
If cooked frozen, does cooking time increase?
cement
How to brush off the rust of a rusted tool.
To cook a steak well done,
To prevent your bread from getting chewy when heating it up in the microwave,
How to make the Jello?
how do you set up a plastic pool?
After putting the jenga set together to secure them
To dye coconut shreds with food coloring,
How to clean car dashboard?
plastic bag
To write using duct tape, how should I make the cuts with a craft knife?
To make a pattern for the marimba keys,
How do you make paper mache glue?
How can I give shoes a better grip?
How to make cookie dough.
closets
How do you ensure an even coat of primer paint on metal?
How to add chocolate flavor to baked goods in a healthy way?
To remove cake from glass bowl after it's been baked.
keep mashed potatoes from looking gray
sofa
glasses
To use a plunger.
What do you do to remove a stain on a white shirt?
To Make Streusel Topping, Place the Flour Mixture Set Aside Earlier in a Bowl. Then Add in Melted Butter.
What supplies are needed to make an infinite LED tunnel?
How to dispose of bread crust.
How best to microwave rice.
How can I print a book cover with a home printer?
ears
How do you make equal sized elevation beams?
To make bite size mint candies from the mint candy dough.
How do I add stripes to my piping bag when making pavlova cookies?
How do you prepare fish food for small fry?
How to wash a dog.
To substitute oil in a recipe to make cake fluffier.
Once the bread slices for dry-fried garlic sourdough soldiers have been dry-fried, what should you then do with them?
What temperature should I cook this Tombstone Pizza at?
To make a sundress out of old men's dress shirts
how can I freeze cake?
How to see if a cake is done.
To install a software in a computer.
To mix eggs and oil together in a pan, you can
What can I use instead of a dustpan?
To make an inexpensive Valentine's day card,
To measure the width and length of a piece of wood, you can
Store saw blades easily.
blade
how do you win at go fish?
how do you use an ebt card at a grocery store?
how to use cajun seasoning
How to cool cookies down quickly?
How to decorate homemade stickers with children.
how do you darken the roots of your hair?
How can I make great hot chocolate that tastes unique?
how to splatter paint a wall.
metal bucket
What supplies and tools are needed to make faux brick walls?
How do you cut down a small sapling?
To calculate free throw percentage in basketball,
What should I do with books I don't need anymore?
If you suspect someone is checking you out
how to make a corn pasta salad
How do I store money that I am trying to hide in my room?
How to get a template for a speed sign.
How do you obtain a Gamecube that is guaranteed to work?
To save money on wedding flowers,
how do you slide your foot forward?
To seal nail art,
wood
How to easily ice a cake?
To see interesting different animals for free,
To win a 5k race,
Projector
To make icing look like real pumpkin, you can
how do you bury something?
To heat dark chocolate to make a magic shell for avocado popsicles.
how do you collect things?
Make a t-shirt from a hoody?
placemat
To create a closure for a necklace.
how do you get rid of an ear infection?
How do I steam an egg to make Chinese steamed egg.
Make a wall shoe rack.
remove paint from concrete
If a disk is skipping
To prevent ovarian cancer,
buttermilk substitution
To switch off a television set.
Increase life of wax candles.
To create a profile on Netflix
How can you vacuum seal a bag at home?
To get the wrinkles out of clothes quickly.
The day love is celebrated world wide
Increase capacity of sauce cup.
How to make magic shell chocolate dip.
To sprinkle grated cheddar cheese over bacon,
comb
stickers
Prevent rust from forming on tools.
To make fake eyes for a project, you can
reading glasses
how to remove self tanner?
Fix damage to hair caused by exposure to chlorine in swimming pools.
One wishes to craft an image of Dr. Doom.
Where can I find sap
What can I use to hold slivers of bar soap and make them usable?
Learn how to clear hazy headlight on a car.
horn
how to remove sprouts and green spots from potatoes
How long should I cook the casserole?
How do you line a surface for painting in straight lines?
How can I keep hair color from staining hands when coloring hair?
Make a cute bracelet out of plastic bags.
How can I store unused cables that I need to keep?
How to load a bobbin into a sewing machine.
brush
To hold a small nail while nailing it without hurting your fingers.
tv tray
To convert cheese into liquid state, you can
How do you clean a yam?
How do you eat cereal?
Stop getting emails from groupon
Decorate bi fold doors
To ensure wood fibers don't weaken the joints in Wood LED Desk Lamp.
how to start seeds for cheap
How to ensure the scale for the room layout is to size?
What materials do you need to make a Donkey Kong shelf?
How do I remove fat from cooked ground beef?
To prevent diseases on seedlings.
How to cut cookies into shapes.
What can I make a cool looking shelf out of?
To add moisture to your hair,
How do I make a dog toy?
How can I easily tote my bagel to work?
Proper grit for sanding bumps on walls?
how do you poke something?
Make a Picture frame.
What supplies are needed to make a DIY fringe chandelier?
To keep your food cool if the power goes out,
to make grocery store list paper
How can I remove odors from shoes?
To play jump rope,
How to make a bookmark with Popsicle sticks.
How to wash the childs hair.
Dryers
How to insert the poles into your DIY spray booth?
How can I cut my sugar intake?
To make sure adhesive sticks on two pieces of wood,
Create a pattern for a shirt.
how do you triple something?
How can I apply leather conditioning cream to shoes?
How to make the boots for your batman costume?
how do you wear airpods?
To remove wrinkles from clothes, you can
How to make Egg Nog Christmas fudge at home.
how to make a makeshift watering can
how to make sweet and savory beef tacos
broom
To get the best ending in Fable 3.
DIY mask for wrinkles
how do you binge food?
aluminum foil
set phone on airplane mode
Make cardboard wall art.
How do you split chicken leg quarters?
mousse
How can I get the garage door to shut?
Prevent raccoon from climbing garbage bin.
To get caked on leftovers off of your pan without scrubbing.
how to clean a cast iron skillet
How to Make Classic Buttercream Frosting
Scissors
grater
To remove a pouch of salmon from the grill, you can
Collecting materials and tools to make a six point craft snowflake.
To set the pie after baking it
To secure string so that it stays within a piece of leather, you can
scissors
how do you pay using apple pay?
how to make chocolat-almond toffee
To prepare fabric for a homemade pillow,
how to use a hacksaw
How to melt marshmallows in microwave
How can my child get a personal letter from their favorite Disney character?
To prevent dust from harming your eyes, you can
To create a Google account
How to easily shred pork?
How do you Hollow out the hole to build your Sunken Trampoline?
Wash the fabric before creating a costume.
car
colander
to store lids and save precious space
how to remove a cork from an empty wine bottle
To attach a leather strap to a leather box
How can I store contacts without a lens case?
What can you use in place of a wooden bow tie?
What time does the sun rise
how to use a pan?
make an easy quesadilla
What can I make out of old pallets lying around?
How to make sure the hair isn't wet after a bath?
.what to do with zucchini tops
To slowly heat up the egg and sugar mixture for making Swiss Meringue Buttercream
How to add bacon fat to wood.
how do you treat period cramps?
horn
How to trace stencil onto paper.
To protect vinyl from the heat of the iron when ironing down the seams
Make paint touch up jar.
fire
To unseal an envelope
spit
How to dry your hair quickly without using a blow dryer?
How to make stout roast
how to make cranberry-apple stuffing
Open an oyster shell
How do you make Iced Coffee?
Make orange peel vinegar cleaner
Prevent paint on window panes.
Remove sticker residue.
video
How to clean a keyboard without wrecking the keybuttons?
how do you put a robe on?
How can I make up to 4 dozen hard boiled eggs at a time?
Make picnic table cover.
How to make Turkey Meatloaf
magazine
to create a recycled bottle-cap flower
how to get extra-smooth scrambled eggs.
To protect your skin from sun damage when outdoors,
how do you read a book?
chopsticks
baking sheet
how do you point at something?
To punch holes on a leather piece in regular intervals.
How to start making your cord bracelet?
What can replenish electrolytes?
How to fix a broken mouse.
Measurement for a Paracord Ring
how do you call a round of poker?
How can I easily thread a needle?
How to scrub grout clean.
To fit two bowls in a microwave that too small,
How can I remove excess fat from baked potato wedges?
To build a toddler bed that looks like a bus.
Pack ballerina shoes for travel.
how to make a ricotta, marmalade and salami sandwich
What is photo fabric?
Making a Hydrating  Hair Mask
To replace the N64 jumper pak.
To hit a hole in one in golf,
how do you use a tissue?
Prevent lint on mirrors from cleaning.
How do you Safely Remove Toxic Palythoas from your Saltwater Aquarium
Attach a handle to a drawer.
Draw a rainbow.
filter
How can I keep children's doll accessories organized?
What is a measure I can take to decrease the symptoms of hayfever?
How do I get a stain out of a red shirt?
To remove a stuck ethernet cable from PC
To prepare cookie dough to bake, you can
To cut hardwood strips for use in a longboard.
How to make instant pudding.
paper
paper towel roll
To create a textured circular pattern on aluminum sheet.
Remove boot stink.
how do you follow a road?
How do you make instant oatmeal?
Remove caulk from the bathtub
How to preserve a grape for long term?
To saute onion and garlic, you can
How to properly clean a piece of pork?
how do you turn all the way around?
How to make Coconut Chocolate Fudge at home.
Treat foot blisters.
Conceal the coffee stain in a new white blouse.
fork
Paint small and hard to reach areas.
To draw lines on a piece of metal to tell you where to cut, you can
To find the stud in the drywall.
How can I tell which way is West when camping without a compass?
planter
What happens if a breeder crosses a horse with a donkey?
how can i make Blonde butter syrup
how to peel a potato Using a Potato Peeler
How to soften hardened glue?
To encourage a young child to learn how to read,
clothes pin
how to make manhattan bourbon balls
flour
How do I fix a small scratch on a hardwood floor?
To mix liquid ingredients inside of a bottle, you can
To preheat a ceramic mold to cast with aluminum.
away team
highlighter
To measure cornstarch, you can
to be unique?
Where to best place a napkin holder?
To switch on Casio fx 100 calculator model.
television
How can I make my smile look more natural in a photo?
How to make a texture stamp?
To join the leather pieces using a leather string.
To stuff a fabric project and give it a heavier weight and feel, you can
How to make chocolate Reeses Pieces candy ice cream at home without an Ice cream freezer.
To save space in a farm
How do you harvest cranberries from a cranberry plant?
how do you get rid of boogers in your eyes when you wake up?
How to efficiently park in the garage while using as little space as possible
newspaper
What are some key ingredients in a vegan salted caramel recipe?
Learn how to garnish and serve a quiche.
how do you wear underwear?
Clean up milk spill.
Remove a bike tire from the rim
Remove coffee and tea stains from inside of cups.
How can you temporarily immobilize a fly?
To prevent your child from falling down the stairs,
rolling pin
How to loosen dried food and dirt waste in your microwave?
To save money with each toilet flush,
How to keep your gummys from sticking to each other?
how do you pop a balloon?
Make an alternative for vinegar salad dressings.
piece of fruit
How can I repair my phone charger?
To cut the bread rolls in half for the cheap pizza bread
What to do if a neighbor's dog keeps making loud noises?
What are the steps to make fried marbles?
How do I fix edges of vinyl wall art rolling up?
How to measure your dog
To remove the last little pieces of broken glass from the floor
To use something more effective at getting rid of coughs than cough syrup.
helmet
To properly put a top sheet on a bed
Make paper boot trees.
cook tomatoes down for sauce
Organize hair ties and scrunchies.
best way to cook scrambled eggs?
How do you use a pastry cutter to cut shortening into the dry ingredients?
Store multiple long garden tools.
Wood
To prepare jalapenos for jelly.
What can I do to get my hair to stack back?
To use hot water bottles without being too environmentally demanding,
How do you dye a shirt with bleach?
Make ice coffee without watering it down
What materials do I need to build a magnet drywall?
To make walnut butter creamier and sweeter.
what temperature should eggs be when baking
how to quickly clean a cutting board after peeling vegetables
How do you build a table?
To attach wooden slats together and ensure that they're flush, you can
How do you keep skunks out of your yard?
How do you make a homemade waterproofing solution for fabrics?
evenly slice fruits
How are slip gauges made?
How to ease your flu symptoms.
Where is the Microscopium  constellation located
how to peel tomatoes
How can you water your home garden without having to do it manually every day?
How to create an anti-allergen vacuum cleaner.
Make keyboard wrist guard.
How can I dispose of a lawn mower if I am scrapping it?
Remove stuck lego pieces.
To drain juice from pineapples, you can
When making a concrete countertop, how do I prop the countertop so I can get your fingers under it and make it easier to grind the edges?
measuring cup
mobile phone
How to  bake bacon in the oven to get perfect crispy bacon
How to lift a toilet seat.
How do I assemble the pavlova cookies once all the prep is ready?
How do you get the beeswax into small pieces?
forceps
floor
mail
How do you french braid hair?
To entertain guests during Christmas break,
How do you break the end off the marker?
To make a mason jar candle.
Prepare smoked barbecue pork with dry rub
To juice a lime.
One seeks to make their own dress.
how to make ranchero burrito
pin
lime powder
receipt
Turn on a ceiling fan.
How to make Garlic Bagel Chips
What sort of mask should I use when working with dangerous chemicals?
How much olive oil should I use in a frying pan to fry vegetables?
To substitute a chip bag clip ( D.I.Y chip bag clip)
For the best toasted sandwich
To mix paint in a cup, you can
how do you prepay something?
plant tomato seeds
To plan out painting your wall with multi-colored squares so you don't repeat colors.
To increase the phone alarm volume in the morning,
Clean your bathroom exhaust fan
To prepare cake for cake pops after it's done baking.
How do I get a stain out of a white shirt?
How to remove rough edges from wood?
Add an open shelf to kitchen wall.
To attach vine leaves to a cardboard box.
How to grip a handle
How do I tidy up my garage?
how to remove gel nails
peeler
how do you break a promise?
How to put on a pair of sunglasses
To prepare the ingredients in a recipe for Dutch Oven, Hearty Cilantro Chicken Soup.
To hide your emergency money
How to make a guitar pick.
How to use a zip blade.
How do you replicate a fingerprint?
Remove rust from a tool.
make a basic peach smoothie
How to keep the shape of tall boots when not in use?
To create a silkscreen stencil, you can
Prevent leftover cake from getting stale.
Learn a new language quickly.
What color rose should be gifted to a romantic interest?
cardboard box
How to condition with the No Poo method.
To prevent your dog from choking,
To get nail polish off if you don't have nail polish remover.
kindle
How to play a Rubber band Kazoo
How can I fix a knife that is dull or has a chipped blade?
To prevent soap scum in the shower,
How do I prepare a container to take care of ducklings?
How to make a vodka and soda?
how to make a toaster pastry
How would you create uniformity in the look of the bookshelf?
To stream an item on YouTube
To connect two small wires together, you can
How to strike a nail with a hammer
Attach the wood together for the box
large tarp
To secure an object in a bucket to create a silicone mold
To rejuvenate an old bike frame sing comic book paper
What do you need to make a bead necklace?
clothing
dye
To improve the skin around your nails,
how do you type an essay?
oven
How do you deal with a nosebleed?
Can you paint with a toothbrush?
To remove a screw from the wall that has been stripped,
how to accent flavors in a dish
Make an extra large ziploc bag.
how do you turn the camera on?
How to make a Denver Omelet at home.
To keep cookies from crumbling.
To prevent your deck wood from fading,
broom
To hammer a nail in straight.
How to Assemble Easy Workshop Cabinets
Prevent diaper rash.
lid
Clean up toothpaste stains from bathroom floor.
How to make an easy led lamp.
Use an alternative to dice.
Create a hanging bag to safely store items in your car from common household objects.
How will you wrap the rice to make sushi?
Removing the handle
how do you swaddle a baby?
glass
Make coconut flavor hot chocolate.
How to Clean Lampshades
To make a carved pumpkin last longer.
How do I make homemade drinkable room spray?
To use a plastic tape dispenser
How can you lower your stress?
To store old decks of playing cards that you don't need.
How to put plywood on the walls of your hut frame?
To spray paint using the stencil.
how to tell if eggs are fresh
How to thread yarn through a hole.
To provide nutrients to plants and vegetables while growing,
To toast buns while making burgers, you can
To warm up after coming in from the snow,
to absorb juices fruit juices from your bin.
How do you cross the busy street to get to the mailbox?
shirt sleeve
Make sour cream
container
How do you fire a gun?
How do I connect the accelerometer to the circuit board ?
How do I freeze a huge pack of ground beef in smaller packages?
What supplies are needed to make a rustic wooden light sculpture?
how to read your blood pressure on digital machine
What can I do to keep from being embarrassed by falling zippers?
How do you write a poem?
Bending rigid materials.
How do you scrape coralline algae off the glass of your reef tank?
How to balance an uneven table.
How to produce swirl pattern when tie dyeing?
Plate
To loosen paracord braid knots in order to attach a key ring
how do you crush a pepper?
how to prevent soggy salads
To brown butter
how do you poison a drink?
How to quickly remove creases from a shirt?
How do you melt chocolate for cooking?
How to Make a 5 Minute Craft Clock to Teach Child to Tell Time
how to make beeswax wraps
How to add windshield wiper fluid.
How to pick up a staple off the floor
How do you remove tissue from a tissue box?
wrapper
To remove the peel from a lemon, you can
Make sweet flavored lip gloss.
how to clean smudges from glass
How do I read quickly
To clean a computer's fan
How do I make my laundry smell fresher?
How do you win a bid on eBay?
How to trim a pythos plant?
how do you borrow something?
How do I put together a salad
how do you calm a baby down?
A buoy
What supplies and tools are needed to make a retro camera lamp?
Prevent toe nail mess.
To make a drawer organiszer using red cedar.
jar
How to make an Apple Pie at home.
how do you stop yourself from oversleeping?
how do you sweep a floor?
To change the color of a wall in your house,
How to play Superman on Nintendo 64?
Make reusable swiffer pads.
How do I water my garden less?
What tools do you need to disassemble a bed?
Protect a butcher block countertop.
how to make apple-grain salad
how do you consume coffee?
ladder
fire
To remove a stuck light bulb from a lamp,
how to keep odors down in the washer
to keep brown sugar soft
wax
Increase pop factor water balloons.
How do you harvest a dandelion?
To drive a screw into a board using a screwdriver,
Planning the Food, Entertainment, and More For a Party
To cut up a quesadilla.
Bags
how to cure the ink on the thread
How do you indicate there is mail in your mailbox?
laptop
Use an old CD for scaring birds from your garden.
how to cook pasta
How do you know if you have successfully made magnetic silly putty.
To raise your children to be more self sufficient,
Gas
Repel dust from cabinets.
How to cut paper to form a bow?
How should I add the vanilla when I'm making cookie-dough slices for desert?
To drill matching holes into the bottom of a 5 gallon bucket and a 14'' plant saucer.
how to ripen fruit
To easily stop hang over pains in the morning,
To separate a baby snake plant to repot
counter
How do I cut a channel in fire brick?
How to clean a chemically contaminated Erlenmeyer flask
tweezers
How do I keep my Playdough soft?
rope
What materials are needed to make a homemade boot brush?
Fill a cup at a soda fountain.
How do you replace old paint?
Make banana Nice cream
To 3d print a mask that will fit your own face.
To fix the dowel on the rubber band gun,
ocean cleaners
softer dog bed
How to make smores.
Make the surface smooth
how to keep your drink holders from getting gunk in them
How to place styrofoam into the bottom of the planter.
To layer the rainbow cookies
how to prevent frizzy hair
How do I cut my nails if I don't have nail clippers?
To make green paint,
How to clean wall clock battery Terminals?
how to make lemon-poppy scones
How can I clean the inside of reusuable straws?
How to make Mocha ice cream at home.
Bake a cake from scratch.
how to make nutella-berry baguette
how do you irritate a cut?
To steal a base in baseball,
nails
To have a healthy smoothie.
wire
How do you make the skirt for a Xena costume?
how do you slice a pizza?
To brew tea without directly heating it
hands
How to make Cherry Red fudge at home.
No can opener and a can of beans.
how do you carry a tv without damaging the screen?
How can I steady and secure my miter box?
Fix broken eyeshadow.
umbrella
How do I add the Cherries to the Cream Cheese Layer when making cherry cheesecake twists?
How to Become EMT Certified
To prepare pieces of olivewood to turn them into a bowl.
Break in a new baseball mit.
To create a base for lamp made from Vodka bottle.
To save time trying to find clothes for your child that match,
To open a stuck jar.
How to make sure the knob offers good grip?
How do I say the alphabet backwards
How to store bandaids in basic survival kit.
Learn an easy way to eat less.
To make hot chocolate out of Nutella,
Prevent shirt buttons from falling.
To glue the cardboard strips to use as a coaster.
Reduce heartburn pain.
Make a work bench using minimal space?
How to clean earbuds
How to sell pokemon cards online.
string
How can I remove grime from shoes?
To cut a length of steel pipe into smaller sections, you can
fingers
aluminum foil
how do I clean my tongue
To remove rust from metal, you can
How do you make hot tea?
Prepare a steak on the grill.
How do you drain water from cooked ginger?
MAKE SHIFT BED
How do you use a meat thermometer on a turkey?
To release muffins from a pan after baking them, you can
How to flatten a bottle cap easily?
how do you keep curls in your hair?
To make homemade popsicles
Screwdriver
wrapper
when to take food off the heat
make spicy fried chicken
mirror
How do I know if I am successfully removing the air bubbles from concrete while pouring when making a countertop?
To try other flavors of cookie spoons
To make a phone call,
how do you open suicide doors in a coupe?
How to remove a blood stain from a shirt.
How to reduce the appearance of wrinkles.
How can you make the paint on your bowling ball that you are making into a Garden Sphere last longer?
shirt
how to properly cook one-tray meals
Make a mushroom omelette.
How to weatherproof the outside of a birdhouse?
One wants to get more organized.
How can I tell from the label if apples are conventionally grown?
How can you save 100 dollars on an Airplane flight?
To add a promo code to your Uber order
How do you fill a pie crust with gelatin?
Remove ink stain from shirt.
how do you win at pie face?
To burn extra calories,
How to make Wild Orange Huckleberry syrup at home.
How can I put out a small fire in my back yard?
How do you create blueprints for your DIY projects?
Make a pet travel dish.
How to ride a bike
Reduce puffiness under eyes.
How to protect a wooden cabinet.
How can I remove blood stains from carpet?
make baked steak
How long do I let balloons dry when making yarn ball art?
To securely attach wood pieces perpendicular to each other
To cut glass bottle to make into a cup.
To attach elastic to a knitted beard so that it fits on your face
Make a yo yo
How to make your egg glow in the dark?
Store
To cut a piece of aluminum foil to size, you can
Temperature of cooked ribs
How to Make an Easy Brie Baked Pumpkin
To help encourage your cat to stay hydrated,
How can I make a cool ink stamp quickly?
Use alternative bed headboard.
Clean your armpits.
parking lot
What is the best bun for hamburgers?
What will you need to clean a small glass jar?
How to Prevent Sweat Stains
How to make homemade bread.
To keep weeds out of your garden,
Keep the top of your refrigerator from getting dirty.
Ice
To help your makeup appear more natural.
How do you clean egg from a pan?
Remove a sticker or label from a an item like a plate.
how do you tuck in your shirt?
Slice a cake with perfect lines.
How to store pearl necklaces?
To remove floor scuff marks.
How can I keep fitted sheets from sliding off the mattress?
How to Make an Arkansas Mud Pie
how to get rid of garlic smell on hands
To make a dress that's a little too short more modest,
How to Make Balloon Rocket Cars
To get through airport security,
how to polish faucets
how do you use force touch on a keyboard?
how do you dim lights?
Improving Your Soccer Skills
To steam stuck on food that's on pots.
Prevent weird taste in oven.
Make Curry almond coconut sauce
vise
How to childproof a child's bed?
How to naturally add nitrogen to my soil?
saw
How To Make Milk Gelatin
seatbelt
To make a window greenhouse, what kind of bin do I need to use?
To mask the wooden piece for painting
To repurpose tin cans at home,
How do I create a butter slab to make croissants?
When I'm making a duct tape canoe, how can I check it for leaks before putting it in the water?
To make bread softer when baking it in the oven,
how do you clear a notification from your lock screen on an iphone?
How to quickly bring water to boil in a pot?
To prevent your blender from burning out when trying to blend banana peels, you can
How to add tread to the bottom of the baby's shoe.
What should you do if you are trapped in your car underwater and can't get out?
To locate where the studs are in a wall, you can
oven mitts
To help keep perfume on your body when wearing it,
Avoid blisters from leather shoes.
To make a cake look like a real school bus, you can
Get rid of headache.
how to make cheeseburger pasta
shoe
To make it easy to find your luggage at the airport carousel
To quickly clean large, dusty ceiling fan blades,
How can I decorate my school folder?
How can I make lemon zest syrup?
how to make a basil-walnut vinaigrette
To fix a door's lock.
What is the best way to properly hang your clothes in the closet?
tape
To get a double bulls eye in a game of darts,
how do you pamper someone?
What part of the pipe and fitting should I heat up when soldering a copper pipe during a plumbing project?
To get dog fur off of your favorite hat before going out.
How can I remove seeds from chili peppers?
To furnish a home without a large budget,
How do you warm up a cold honeybee outside?
How do i store fresh basil?
To make a circle bigger that a normal compass.
how do you play with a pinata?
To make protruding wires for a cyborg costume,
how to tell if your oil is hot enough
To mix butter with dry ingredients, you can
How to Get Rid of Thigh Pain
How to make Apple tarts at home.
how to maintain the shape of sweaters
how do you bribe someone?
how to make polenta with pesto
To help protect the skin on your face,
How to burn name on wood.
trowel
How to boil perfect eggs.
To replace a battery in a smoke detector.
How to Clean Brooms
foot
clamps
What are the steps to making a paper lantern?
reed mat
Make a pyramid shoe rack.
What is the best way to vacuum?
How to color R2D2's body with paint.
Once you have applied frosting to your window, what should be your next step?
To remove a stripped screw.
how do you connect two ideas?
how do you use hand sanitizer?
How to make tea with a tea bag?
How do I make the sandwich when making a cherry cheesecake twist?
blender
To remove the film created when using egg whites to buff leather.
Make a book plant holder.
How do I vibrate the concrete when pouring a concrete marble countertop?
To attach two sticks together,
How can I measure the size of my foot for sneakers.
To keep your fingers clean when dunking cookies in milk.
To create an even hole a plastic bottle cap, you can
What can I use to protect me from hail and snow
How to make a simple beer opener?
What is a good tip for someone who is carving wood for the first time?
How to Remove Spray Paint from skin
To find out why rubber bands made with Oogoo are better than standard rubber bands.
How to store tools so they are easy to access?
How to decorate a cut up tennis ball.
What kind of candy should I have if I want to reduce stress?
how do you blow up a jumping balloon?
To add soy sauce to noodles.
Get a band-aid to stay on your finger
To fix a computer that is freezing or locking up,
how to make soap
how to peel a potato
What kind of bonding agents do you need on hand to make an iPod stand?
Make a touch up container for paint jobs.
To save money on gas,
To turn on a smartphone.
How do you run a slant route in football?
Cut out a snowman shape from wood
How to make the top of your Q-Tip storage tube?
paper
how to make bistro bacon vinaigrette
skillet
how do you remove blood from carpet?
how do you straddle something?
how do you know an avocado is ready?
how to roast broccoli
Remove a fake tan
how to interrupt someone?
How to blanch vegetables
crane
ball
What can i use to help filter water when I am camping.
ladle
How to raise the temperature of a room?
What do I wear for winter
How can I light a stick with no materials
sock
cardboard
How to Make a Sponge Motorboat
What is a good easy way to carry condiments at a party or barbeque?
To clean up spilled grease on a wooden floor.
How to make a root beer float
To remove rust from a cast iron pan
To cook sunny side up eggs
How do I fix the wooden plug in  the frame ?
how do you put a baby in a stroller?
How do you remove dust from your fan?
how to make ranch dressing
Flip a coin
To know if you are dehydrated,
To start an android phone.
how do you listen to music on earpods on an iphone x?
stick
To chop rosemary into a powder,
make quinoa
What kind of sticks should be used?
How to clean a hand saw.
How do I heat cream to make a creme brulee?
Create a decoy figure.
For mosquito yard spray
how do you rewind a dvd?
How do I open a beer bottle with a key?
To produce different sounds with a kinetic drumming sculpture.
Planning drinks for a party
Add a shelf barrier.
To stop an alarm clock's alarm.
How you can find lost items like an ear ring or other small jewelery or coins.
how to make a hard boiled egg
how to make chocolate chow mein
how do you dismiss something?
When aging paper with tea, what should I do with the tea bags?
To stir the pancake pumpkin mix until just combined.
sleeve
To hold your spot on a roll of tape.
crockpot
egg carton
Make a veggie and dip plate.
Remove pet hair from furniture and clothes.
Open a can using a can opener.
To make comments in C# programming language.
What can I use as impromptu or make shift crochet sticks?
To brighten clothes without using bleach.
Hide male bald spot.
how do you disagree with something in court?
3 ingredient ice cream.
To keep your glasses safe from scratches in your bag,
eye glasses
hand
How to best feed baby rabbits?
To soothe your gums after having braces put in,
How can I hang up things on my walls without leaving marks?
Make a great hard boiled egg.
how to make apple-herb stuffing
How to make Elderberry syrup at home.
Make mini lantern.
crowbar
how do you honor a judge in court?
To remove the cooked love cookies from the baking sheet
What can I use to make shiny headgear for my costume?
How to cook pancakes.
key
To polish furniture,
How do you paint a ceiling?
How do I find my garden tools easier when gardening?
How should I act when I am in an argument with someone?
How do I keep the end of the rope from fraying when making a hangman's noose for backpack?
To mix pumpkin and egg together,
machete
To make a hot dog sandwich,
magazine
To teach a child their ABC's
paper clip
How do I remove the bottom of a light bulb?
how do you look up an address?
Create a spear.
Remove itch from sore throat.
How to make sure the bacon is done.
how do you take a dissolving pill?
Protect skin from sun.
How can you be a hundred percent sure you won't forget an item in the morning if you are in a rush?
How to use a clothes hanger to clear a clogged sink
How can I easily remove wrinkles from clothing in the dryer?
How do I unlock a miter saw?
Keep brown sugar soft.
How to make fresh boysenberry Blueberry syrup for pancakes at home.
How do you cut down a tree?
Conceal scuff marks on furniture.
What should I use to drill the hole?
To mice garlic, you can
How to cook bacon
to level fresh concrete.
How can I stop myself from coughing uncontrollably?
Remove gum from hair.
How to Secure Straws Together to Build Slingshot Straw Rocket
Make coffee in a french press
To draw a pattern to cut a piece of steel
To hide the wiring for the LED eye lights,
If you download a PDF file and it's an exe file
how to easily clean your baseboards
how do you scrap something?
How to take raw lumber and make it a uniform size?
Clay pots
a jar
feed birds
How do you make sun tea?
To make creamy popsicles without using dairy.
To open a bag of potato chips without spilling them,
To protect walls from door knobs.
How to Add Calcium to a Concrete Mix
To know when the top of the super mario mushroom cookie is done
How can I sharpen knives at home without a knife sharpener?
how do you preheat an oven?
How to attach string for transport onto chair.
Remove stripped screw.
To remove self-tanner mistakes
How to take a vitamin C pill
How do you make Bamboo floors shine?
To run a flea flicker play in football,
binoculars
Avoid mess from opening up gifts.
To prevent salt from sticking in the salt shaker, during humid months,
How to keep jewelry from damaging in a jewelry box?
Learn how to get ready to take a shower.
how do you take fake nails off?
what materials are needed to make milk jug skulls?
cane
How can I attach my keys to my belt?
How to buff your nails at home.
Mark wall with frame mounting location.
How to Make Banana Peel Tea
how to make chocolate haystacks
How do you protect yourself when you are just starting to learn how to use a wood carving knife?
how do you know a phone is fully charged?
How do you remove the leftover candy ingredients from Skittles vodka?
To make glue more liquid and easier to spread, you can
how do you invite people to a wedding?
How to Paint Easy Workshop Cabinets
Keep straw in place for soda can.
Clean your gas stove burners.
How to Give Up Coffee
how do you swipe right on your phone?
Make a cake in a mug
How to Get Out of Debt Without Hurting Your Credit
sponge
How to freshen up your front door.
Last step finish and attach hardware to chopping board.
Apply fake blood and a wound to a mouth
To secure chicken wire to a wooden frame,
To connect logs on top of each other for a log cabin.
To add water to cracked eggs,
To record a note that is too high to sing with your voice,
To squeeze all of the toothpaste out of a tube,
To add toppings to your taco,
How do I know when my gelatin is ready to use when making ice cream?
If I want to make an old table finished with epoxy into a pallet coffee table, how do I take off the existing surface?
Make wooden trash bin.
How to take a selfie
To drink water from a water bottle,
How to fix a chair that has become wobbly.
how to create a super-easy smokey eye
How do you get ejected in basketball?
television
To make a source of light that won't burn a plant, you can
Recycling used coffee grounds, flour and water to mould and bake biodegradable flowerpots.
How can I get my sneakers to smell fresher?
To wire a computer fan to power when outside the computer.
To clean dirt off the floor,
How to soften hard paint?
How do I charge at someone
Accepting an Award
Making Tea with Flavored Simple Syrup
At what temperature should I bake the focaccia bread?
When making a miniature polymer birthday cake, what kind of clay should I use?
how to make a yellow trio
chisel
How to make a phone call using old rotary phone?
Can I change the color of my blood
how to reduce heat in peppers
How do you replace batteries on a Wii remote?
To make it easier for someone to identify your house,
how to clean a disk.
To prepare Larabar dough for cutting.
To make a beer cold quickly,
rug
scissors
how to get soft, fluffy towels
make a monkey business drink
To pare fruit.
how do you draw a circle?
How do you remove the motherboard from a computer case.
To figure out what type of dog you should get,
To seal a length of tubing, you can
fork
How do you pack a first aid kit?
How to prevent goods being damaged when shipping them?
To beat eggs and sugar together.
Remove tough smudges from reading glasses.
How to thread a needle.
lime powder
To secure nut strongly to threaded metal rod.
What kind of tools and materials do you need for an outdoor shelter?
What is the best way to go to sleep at a decent hour?
How can I mark where to cut on a piece of wood?
How do I smooth out the edges of the PVC pipe ?
How can you cut a watermelon open if you don't have a knife?
How to dice tomatoes for a pico de gallo?
bottle
To fold a towel in a decorative way
how do you indent a paragraph using a keyboard?
knife
how do you keep your lips from chapping
how to keep pasta from sticking together
How can I stop a vacuum from overheating or jamming when in use?
Light a fire without wood.
Too hard to open pistachio?
Enhance memory when studying for test.
To apply mascara.
thermos
How To Make an Arkansas Mud Pie
socket
How do I solidify the chocolate balls ?
To help the outside of a pretzel turn golden brown quickly in the oven, you can
How do you cut a board?
To get your cat to start staying off the furniture.
How can you deal with crickets in your yard?
what goes into mango coconut popcicles?
broom
Building the top
how do you remind someone of something?
pencil
How do you keep unnecessary papers and mail from piling up?
How to Add Dots to Lawn Dice Faces
how to make sugar-and-spice hot cooca
To make banana pudding with vanilla wafers.
How do you clean a statue?
stop rust on garden furniture
How can you make yourself more alert and stop feeling sleepy?
How do I remove the combustion chamber door from my furnace?
bin
thread
How do I put a 1 1/8 inch hole in the wood?
How to change a headlight.
How to Care for Your Teeth
Organize small art crafts.
How are the marshmallows melted in a no bake cake?
How do you create a soap dish mold?
How can I perk up wilted green onions?
If you are a visual learner, you can learn by
To open up "my computer" on a Windows PC,
To  peel a banana,
To quickly dry wet pantyhose,
How can I open a stuck screw top lid?
To start a hole of golf,
How can I strain chestnuts before roasting?
how do you blaze through a street?
hands
To re-shape a ring
Make a kids ice pack.
How do you make a dull knife shiny?
how do you prevent getting pregnant?
To get kids to eat celery,
Carrots
credit card
Prevent cat damage on Christmas tree.
To get creases out of ribbons.
How to coat an Altoid tin to bake bread in it.
Bake bananas for Banana Ice Cream
Make a string dispenser.
To dispose of bacon fat, you can
leather
how do you fix hunger?
When making focaccia bread, what should I mix my ingredients in?
To create holes in a wooden rectangle so you can place a peg in it, you can
fork
How to put socks on?
How to insure that your hands don't hurt when lifting weights at gym?
how to chop odd shaped vegetables
How can you get a good idea regarding the pay level at a job you are interviewing for, without asking outright?
How can I use rocks in my garden?
How do you polish baked polymer clay beads?
Where can I see the stars
how do you register a car?
how to make single cup coffee sachets
How to boil eggs
saucer
How do you help a plant cutting root more quickly using pruners?
To make cotton balls more easily flammable,
how do you use a link on a computer?
How get small candles ready to melt together
Remove pet hair from car seats.
To remove glue from pre-glued veneer with little effort.
Chalk will remove all grease stains.
To keep mildew from growing on your shower curtain.
How do I add 2 holes in the plastic ?
How to wash a bike
how to easily slice chilled cookie dough
To get rid of a cough at night when you're trying to sleep.
is it okay to eat baking chocolate with a white film?
how do you turn off the alarm on a car with the remote.
To start the paracord braid,
How do I chop the pecan pieces when making creamy chocolate toffee torte?
How do you hang dresses?
If you are looking for a free version of a program how can you get JUST the program and not be signed up for a free trial that will later try to bill you?
What kids of metal can you recycle?
Create heating zones on stove.
Remove hair clogging a shower drain.
Kaleidoscope
nail file
how to brush your hair?
To mold the cowboy cookies into flat disks,
To make your free standing bookshelf more stable.
textbook
How do I wash my car?
To find a local recycling facility,
Shine metal insturments without commercial polishes.
To soothe a colicy baby,
To make a lightweight prop sword for cosplay.
What can I use to bind two pallets together?
make bracelet
how do you show that you're sad?
making six pack holder
Repair DVD scratches.
To make a poached egg,
How to avoid staining skin with hair dye when dying hair
How can you drill a hole through a wooden surface?
Label topic of a paper notebook
To make a tube out of paper
Prevent muscle cramps.
What supplies are needed to make a butterfly wreath?
how to sweep a floor?
Make patio stepping Stones
How can I store batteries for later use?
To suppress a cough without getting sleepy,
Make a double boiler to melt chocolate
How can you cook a large amount of hot dogs?
What can I use as a flower planter?
how do you stay above water in the ocean?
To make a guitar tone sound like it would be used in the metal genre,
how do you hang up on a phonecall?
Defrost meat last minute
How can I reduce my calorie intake?
placemat
Create a comfortable study area
To unscrew a Flathead screw without a screwdriver,
To eat Orange chicken without a fork.
what to put in a jar for chicken soup
whiteboard
How can you make an easy waterproofing solution for fabric?
how to keep stuffed apples upright when baking
How to grate parmeasan cheese
One wants to protect their locked goods.
how do you let dishes soak in water?
How to awaken Amazon Echo to ask it a question?
Make zucchini noodles
To roll out dough without a rolling pin.
to get into a box?
To make sure that a vent has a secure air flow, you can
Avoid tangled saran wrap.
earring back
How to apply sealant to wood.
What is the best way to paint the surface of a swimming pool?
How to perform a  barbell curl?
how do you wear eyeshadow?
how do you transfer money to your bank?
stove
To prepare the cured pork butt for cooking.
wash cloth
How can I hang clothes in a closet that doesn't have a rod installed?
how to make a cookbook stand
flashlight
How to make Chocolate Tart at home.
how to get a streak free shine
nails
how do you photograph something?
Make Keto avocado hummus
How to make Prickly pear Sauce at home.
how to make flower water?
how to clean out candleholders
To create a place for air to vent inside of an enclosed box, you can
how do you jumble something?
To shape a piece of iron wire to a needed size, you can
Hunt a deer in the woods.
To collect lint from the dryer for later use like fire starter.
How to clean windows without using paper towels.
How to Make Dough for Easy Flatbread
How do you properly bake chickpeas so they come out crispy?
To measure a piece of material to make slippers, you can
To deal a deck of cards.
How to curb your dog?
To bend brass wire into a shape of an outline on a piece of paper.
How do you roast broccoli?
Makeshift baby crib.
how do you rebuild something?
To open a cereal box.
how do you blend eyeshadow colors?
What ingredients should I use to make the batter?
To clamp the box together,
clear a room full of cigarette smoke
Make a S'moreo treat.
To prevent a pie crust from burning while you bake it, you can
To remove excess mirror mastic,
How do you take an over exposed photograph?
Open beer bottle.
To get perfect pieces in a specific shape for cosplay.
shot glass
How to make Mango syrup at home.
how do you play peek-a-boo?
how to keep from getting lumpy baked goods
To accommodate a plant that is growing too large for it's container,
When gluing tiny items, what is a good tool to use for affixing each piece?
What can I do to protect me from the wind
Reduce energy use.
how do you take a shot?
Figure out how to plant a tree.
Make a laundry bag.
How to quickly cool fried chicken so it can be eaten?
A steamroller
How sharp should you make the butter knife?
How to clean the halter top when needed?
How to clean oven.
To wash a knife.
sieve
Avoid developing stinky feet.
To create glue to stick yarn around a balloon.
torch
how to make a sandwich?
how do you go on a shopping spree?
video
How to form a large head on a beer when pouring from a tap?
One wants to decorate but show their personal style.
make Latin Rice with Pigeon Peas
How can I easily extract a splinter?
Sanitize toilet seat quickly.
To save money on gas,
D.I.Y stamp with  foam Paper with Sticky Backing , acrylic Paint & Brush or Ink PadScissors, Cardboard or other object to attach stamp to
grow your own lettuce
To fix a drawer.
What can you do if your floors squeak?
How to make a automatic aquarium cleaner?
coffee filter
Recycle your T shirts into a bag.
Cut a hole in a metal tub.
What should be stored on your home workbench?
What can you do to protect plants during seed germination and while the plant is young and fragile?
To make your own mascara in a pinch,
how do you use the question mark on the laptop keyboard?
How can you make edible glue?
Secure a dog bowl from tipping over
paint
To make an easy Father's day gift,
Add key to key ring with ease.
To clean rust off of a cast iron skillet,
What kind of objects can I use to make a fossil?
baseball
To harden balls of combined coconut flakes, powdered sugar, butter and corn syrup.
burn ants
How can I check the miter gauge of my table saw ?
throw
What kind of sugar can you use to make royal icing?
how do you pay for your tab by yourself at applebees?
To ensure two boards are cut to the exact same length,
bat
How to flush a toilet.
Marinate raw meat.
What can I do with old coffee cans?
To help you prepare for an interview
q-tip
tack
How do I seal up the gap between brick and the studs of the walls of a sunroom when making an addition to a house?
To attach missing leads to a solar panel, you can
To improve the color of barbecue pork,
To erase pencil lead from paper.
How to prevent grease splatters when cooking without a grease splatter shield?
Clean a saucepan with stuck on food.
two forks
What will deter deer from eating up your yard?
To tell if broccoli is done cooking, you can
When removing rust from objects, what is the best kind of brush to use?
How to remove label from soda bottle.
metal can
To make a homemade nail polish remover
To make a cell phone alarm louder,
To mix butter and flour with milk, you can
highlighter
To remove the cheese crisps from un-greased baking sheet.
To cut corn off of the cob the easy way.
To mix eggs and cream cheese together,
Divide dirty clothes from clean in luggage.
To cook hot dogs in the microwave.
Treat bleeding gums.
how do you use the face id on an iphone x?
A knife
plastic wrap
Sanitize bathroom rags.
how do you table something?
To avoid the whipped cream from melting and making a mess of your watermelon cake
To fill a car with gas.
How should I store natural peanut butter?
Prevent napkin from sticking to cup.
To make a cheese quesadilla,
To switch on an android phone.
How to get seedlings plenty of light?
To make oatmeal cookies gluten free
What can I use to clean microwave easily?
Steps to debone a chicken leg.
To organize snacks in a pantry.
how to clean grease spills
Attach a block of suet to a tree.
To cover a bowl with dough in it,
Paint a wall without painting baseboards
What can I use to make my own tea bags
To prepare asparagus.
How to remove scratches from a CD or DVD disk?
Pour hot wax into a rubber glove.
To store smoothies after making them, you can
how do you stop yourself from sneezing?
pole
How to make blackberry tarts at home.
How can I protect a cell phone from the rain?
how do you make a beaded necklace?
how to make candy apples
How can I be sure to never get my e mail address wrong when using my phone?
How to keep the end or your charger wire straight
how to get perfect scrambled eggs
How to make sure picture frame is level.
How can I make scrambled eggs creamier?
How to protect table from glue
nail file
Decide what to throw out.
Make jar labels easier to remove.
To make your music sound more futuristic,
To get the cloth cloak to stick to the baby doll.
What can you add to traditional smores?
To warm butter to room temperature,
how to make crackerwiches
To make an ice pack yourself without spending the money.
How can I set aside 500 dollars, a bit at a time?
How do you braid thread in order to make a friendship bracelet?
how to take a nap?
To blend pineapple.
To prevent a sandwich from getting soggy inside a sandwich bag,
Add space shaving bathroom supply organizer.
sledgehammer
How to keep brownies from sticking
bench
Use Foil to clean pans
To save yourself problems in a foreign country
How should water be forced from freshly prepared tofu?
What electronic parts are easiest to solder?
box
How to melt wax?
Prevent creases in dress pants.
How to mount plexiglass to table.
To repair a rip in a pair of jeans,
How do you make a double boiler if you don't have one?
rags
How to Be More Likeable
What do I need to make a sugar candy?
how do you use teeth whitening toothpaste?
how do you move when you hit a ball at bat?
To light a candle.
crayon
How do you win in checkers?
The birds are decimating my grapes just as they are nice a juicy, help!
how to make a classic vinaigrette
What kind of rice do I need when I am making fried rice ?
How to dig hole to plant seed.
Make pop corn.
Choosing the right metal file
how to cut flower stems before vasing?
Soak beans for cooking
how do you buff a nail?
Remove black scuff marks.
how do you make a box of a dozen donuts?
microwave
How do I know when onions are sauteed?
What can you use as a release agent to coat the plastic bowl to help remove the clay from the bowl?
How can I clean my guitar strings?
how do you save a video from snapchat?
how do you propose to a woman?
how do you turn the brightness on your phone down?
To reheat leftovers in your microwave more evenly
Make a tracing table.
How do you make bait to put inside a homemade soda can wasp trap?
One seeks to bind some wood.
How long should you let Bentonite Green Sand dry?
How do you make homemade bath bombs smell nice?
To use a mortar and pestle
Make a man love you.
To change games in cart-based consoles.
How to save a comment on Reddit
Dine on a car.
To have the freshest lettuce possible to eat,
To glue pallet wood pieces to make a larger wooden board
Adding the beads to the heart shape
close the bottom of a dog food tote bag
bowl
Eliminate fish smell in kitchen.
make waffles out of cake mix
How to drill a pilot hole for a screw in wood.
To deodorize a pair of shoes.
how do you fold a burrito?
To make cascading diamond earrings,
canteen
How to grease a loaf pan
how do you kneel?
How can you make a pedestal for a homemade rain gauge?
To make a newspaper tube,
candle
crescent wrench
how to mix concrete for a slab
To prepare a dish of Jell-o to be served at a party,
how to store citrus zest
two coins
What tool is best to cut a stencil from an image on a computer?
How do you fill a cupcake with icing?
how do you test out a camera?
plastic cup
How to fix a dryer that is not drying.
nail clipper
What ingredients do I need to make no churn oreo ice cream?
grater
How can I use the sliver from a bar of soap without adding to the mess in the landfill?
To clean a watch dial,
To make a packet of instant noodles spicier,
where is the Volans constellation located
To waterproof wood for rain.
Keep a bag of chips closed without bag clips.
To clean your ears when they are dirty.
How do you make butter at home?
How do I correctly put the letters onto the sign?
To protect the soles of your feet from harm while outdoors,
How can I roast hazelnuts?
To make plants flourish after planting, you can
knees
how to melt butter
How can I wrap bacon around peppers securely?
To open a letter carefully without a letter opener.
One seeks to build a mood light.
To be able to better spot your luggage at baggage claims,
How to Make Chocolate Mousse
teeth
pole
How do you make homemade cat food?
What is the easiest way to use cream to decorate a cake?
To place M&Ms on the lego brownies correctly
To make orange paint,
How to prevent ice from forming on car windows?
How can you curve a piece of metal?
To keep a yard looking green all year, no matter what region you are in,
Prevent cold sensation from eye drops.
To make a stain remover.
sandpaper
Make a mixed drink.
how do you hold someones hand?
To keep Space Shuttle Rocket Stove from cooling too quickly.
How can I make ice
Add extra towel space to a bathroom.
To make sure that you are happy with your hair and makeup for your wedding,
How to avoid getting wet while going out in the rain?
Get rid of foul odors in the kitchen.
How to quickly dry a shirt?
How to clear notifications on an android phone
make paper glasses
To secure a thread inside of a needle, you can
What should I do if I have unused business attire that I want to donate?
What will it look like?
Hold hair bands on sink.
When making cotton candy without a machine, what do I do with the spatulas?
The clean the dirt out of carpet,
How to Serve Garlic Aioli
To cut lengths of wood to use in a project, you can
chop sticks
Hold small nails and screws.
fix a broken keyboard stand
To fix prescription glasses with broken arms,
cement
To remove blood stains from fabric.
How can I always remember the exact length of extension cords?
To combine spinach, feta, and chickpeas to make hummus, you can
How do I clean a pair of satin high heels?
How to mix your smoke bomb mixture?
Adding a radius to the corner of the steel.
To make cream cheese easier to mix, you can
metal bar
To paint when you don't have any actual paints.
Make a rolling pin from a bed post.
How to sew kite.
To get the seeds out of a pumpkin.
How do you position the brim of the hat?
To make a color of oil paint darker,
how do you know if you have gas in your car?
What kind of donuts can I make in the air fryer?
Remove old bumper stickers from automobiles without using solvents.
How do you keep cookies from spreading when baking?
get coconut from the shell
Backseat Desks for the kids to play with
Classic Spaghetti Sauce with Meat
To get Jello to completely dissolve.
To round the edge of a wooden stick, you can
chopsticks
How to quickly melt chocolate bars?
To add stability to PVC pipes after screwing them into place, you can
To prevent splashes when using the toilet,
When building a wooden base for a box, to ensure the wood stays together while drying, you can
How to remove stain from Marble counter-top?
cardboard box
Find more fish in the lake.
how to get rid of gnats
To make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich,
how do you use an ebt card?
How to make Japanese Persimmon Sauce at home.
Who is the best professional to ask about a good doctor?
How to charge your apple watch.
To stuff a pillow with down,
To keep food from sticking to the grill.
how do you download a playlist on spotify?
How to lsoe weight by exercising
rubbing
how do you change an order at a restaurant?
In order to finish the ends of your paracord bracelet,
To slice cookie bars in a pan,
Purchase your first screwdriver.
skateboard
to get free internet.
To prevent the plastic covering on a lamp from melting, you should
Fixed warped flooring.
To make the edges of a work piece smoother and blunt
To write your name on the sidewalk with a piece of chalk.
How can you lessen your risk of Heart Attack or Stroke?
rope
binder clip
What should I use to make batter for a southern fried pizza?
Secure food thermometer to pot.
how to make bourbon-pecan stuffing
How to ensure food cooks evenly
Prevent books from falling off bookshelf
ball
How do you make an origami kite?
t-shirt
how do you shave a mustache?
how do you respond to a text?
wet towel
Cheap and easy room deodorizer.
To attract hummingbirds to your yard,
how to tame pepper heat
How to hit a ball in baseball?
To score 7 points in a football game,
To make a grocery list
Attach a garden hose to an outdoor spigot.
What is the best way to mix the ingredients?
To make some hot chocolate,
Where do you find materials for your own faux animal head inexpensively?
Monkeys
how to make tropical clementines
How can you freshen your kitchen quickly?
Make a bagel holder
Start plant seedlings organically.
How to mark golf balls so you can identify them out on the golf course?
how do I make avocado dressing?
How do you tell if milk is spoiled?
Make reusable food strainer.
How to finely chop an onion
how to remove grass stains from clothes
Make a Cute Windowsill Vase out of Recycled Materials
How do I give my PC a deep clean?
To remove paper glued to wood to serve as a template for drill holes.
where to find already ripe avocados?
How do you protect your hands while cutting boxes with extremely sharp objects?
How do you prevent onions from sticking to the pot when you brown the onions?
stainless steel bucket
How to know if a fridge is cold or not?
To pull a coil to elongate it, you can
How do I prepare the oreos when making no churn oreo ice cream?
How do you bead the necklace?
To protect your eyes from the sunlight,
Prevent cracked eggs during boiling.
How do you add flavoring to stove popped popcorn?
Light up tiny candle wicks.
To crush cookies, you can
How can you embellish your homemade ski gloves?
salt
how to sanitize a kitchen sponge?
how do you tackle someone?
how to replace a graden hose end
Grilling Avocados
How To make a Caramel Sauce
What are cookie cutters for when making an apple pie?
Prevent fighting between babies in car ride.
To bake cookies with perfect texture.
how do you set off a motion detector light?
Learn how to make a storage spot for a hairdryer in the bathroom.
To remove a dandelion from the ground, you can
To start a fire when you have no kindling.
How can you clean your shoelaces?
How to Make Sugar and Spice Mixture for Apple Roses
To make a costume
shoes
how do you show muscles?
Lug wrench
How do I cream butter to make butter cookies?
To hollow an apple to make a pie 'crust'.
tupperware
Use a magnifying glass to kill an ant.
To protect your shoes from scuffs.
how to make pretty butter pats
To help keep brown sugar from clumping up in storage,
what do I do with chicken and bacon to make dinner?
Make a plastic phone holder.
Graffiti
To make sure that homemade french fries are crispy, you can
linen cloth
Weaken seal of a sealed envelope.
How can I make a cute holder for towels or mail?
To clear crawling ivy and stop it from blocking your stairwell,
how do you look at one friends location specifically on find my friends?
How do you drill a hole in the same spot on every cabinet door without having to measure?
how to write perfectly on a cake
binder clip
Prevent babies from opening cabinets.
How do you solder two coins together?
How do you make a homemade candle smell good?
To cook mushrooms in a pan
What items do I need to make a bed?
To make chowder become a smooth sauce, you can
Dishtowels 
How do you replace the cream from an Oreo with peanut butter?
To attach plastic for a liner to the bottom of a wooden box
Carry a propane tank without it rolling around in your vehicle.
To heat milk, you can
How to put batter in a loaf pan
To make it so that breadcrumbs will stick to pork, you can
To firm up the cookie batter prior to cooking
Remove nails from planks.
How to make key lime sauce at home.
Make a quick no-sew superhero cape.
Prepare beer cans to be used as hair rollers
notebook binder
how do I fill a water balloon?
To soften clay before working with it, you can
How to clean computer screen.
how do you cover a window up?
To make a syrup using sugar and cinnamon.
To clean a section of metal without rusting it, you can
To lose weight.
To pack for a vacation carefully,
To avoid packing too much for your trip,
How to heat crayons with heat gun.
To plan for a vacation,
How do I cut off the top of the box ?
pitcher
credit card
Where to get good treats in IKEA.
Clean up the appearance of a used text book.
glue
how do you relapse?
What fabric should I use to make DIY kitchen towels?
Mix an Oil-Fighting Mask with Strawberries
What can you do with your key if you are on a run or hike with no pockets?
How to make a donut for a pendant lamp from recycled wood.
Make organic toothpaste.
To cut onions without your eyes tearing up.
save 100,000
To hide spare key in the vinyl siding of your house.
How can I keep a bag of cereal sealed securely after I open it?
How do you get rid of skunk spray?
To keep your basement from smelling musty,
how to master the quick pickle
To get a player out in baseball,
How can you guard against theft of your bank money?
How to make Peach Daiquiri Ice cream at home.
Around what age is an average toddler ready to start potty training?
Remove swelling from acne.
Prevent getting wet from rain during camping.
brick
How can I relieve Migraine headaches at home?
How to make an easy finger skateboard?
What can I use to plant seeds inside before starting a garden?
to make a fun and messy twister game
how do you give a thumbs down?
To clean an electric razor.
To firm up the spekulatius cookie dough
If you want to deep fry turkey, what should you consider before buying turkey?
What kind of box should I use for the seat part of a cardboard Iron Throne cat bed?
How do you make "eggs and bacon" candy?
highlighter
How do you escape a car if the car is sinking?
Paint a design on a glass or cup.
To get a canned beverage completely cold in 15 minutes
How can I poke a hole in leather without a leather punch?
how to strike a match on a zipper
how do you make a frozen waffle?
How can I get cheap Pizza?
Prevent wasted food.
plate
To play a VHS tape.
needle and thread
Fill a cupcake without a pipe bag
what can I use to make bean soup in a jar
How do I keep a pot of pasta from boiling over?
Clean an outdoor grill grate.
How do I flavor the filling for a clear lime pie?
How can you double your zip loc bags?
How do you add hinges to a cabinet?
pumice
television
transfer items from cutting board
My phone does not properly charge, or it charges slowly, how can I fix this?
How to make an easter nest edible?
To glue magnets to a board
How can I fit more ketchup into the small paper cups they give you?
freeze soup
How can you store your boots in the closet so they won't be smushed?
vacuum
how can i make my own Italian seasoning blend?
How can I make my own fire starters for camping trips?
How do you row a boat?
How do you remove a sliver?
How to trim leather tassels evenly.
How to clean your tires white sidewalls
How do you get into an Eagles game?
how to make a pistachio slush
How to hollow an egg.
Fill chocolate molds with chocolate
What must be done before the first step?
To decorate a wooden nesting box which won't harm wildlife
To simplify the wood carving process,
To clean a mousepad
To add something to a homemade baby rattle so it makes noise.
How to connect metal bars to make bicycle cargo trailer.
how do you invite someone somewhere?
Help your arthritic dog up steps
How can I keep an egg from spoiling quickly while making egg tempera?
How do you plan for a good nap?
How can I keep kitty litter from spreading all over the house?
To reduce the swelling of acne,
Soothe a fever.
Make a sauce tray.
How to clean a table.
how to keep fish from sticking to the pan
how do you pull over for a cop when driving?
To increase the number of calories your body burns in a day,
Keep bathroom drawers organized.
rubber band
Prevent table cloth at park from blowing away.
What should be mixed with yolk for Deviled Eggs?
What can I do about a rash or when my skin is irritated?
To keep flower pots from damaging floors and furniture.
To make it easier for sugar to dissolve into water, you should
credit card
To heat butter so it melts, you can
How to Make a Fruit Fly Trap
How to clean a wooden acoustic guitar?
To make the pie crust into the pie shape.
how do you kill an ant?
To prevent the kneaded cinnamon bread dough from sticking while rolling it out
How do i make juice
How to Start a Day in a Healthy Way
Use alternative mouth wash.
To prevent a child from making purchases on a cell phone,
How can I hang a curtain without a curtain rod?
To put canned pumpkin and egg together,
To reward your children for doing chores,
How do I fend off a male attacker who is stronger than me?
bench
One wants to re-purpose an old hoodie.
how do I clean a baby bottle?
make chex mix
After making homemade BBQ sauce, you should
water bottle
how to make caesar blend dressing
Hem your own pants.
To melt crayons for use in art.
How do I clear my mind to get the best possible sleep?
To replace the battery on a smoke detector.
To keep a lawn green and free of weed,
To choose a pot for growing plants,
How can you get a child to smile in a photo?
How to fold a coin into a ring?
Make the eye slots bigger in a latex mask
How can I make orange scented candles at home?
plastic wrap
How do you remove whitewash from brick?
To mail a letter,
How to change the batteries in a television remote.
Remove lingering kitchen smell.
how do you let something rot?
Make a clothes hamper.
How do you hang a shelf?
tub
Create a spooky Halloween lawn decoration.
how to keep mosquitos away while sitting around a fire
how do you choose what song to play next on spotify?
Choose a suitable object for the project.
To make a quick base for a DIY arts and crafts box.
How to remove the fishy smell from a kitchen after cooking fish?
To hit a home run,
what to do with old, stale bread
how do you help someone?
how to cream butter
spatula
to stop brown sugar from going hard
how do you count down?
Increase cushion for dog bed.
how do you accept a request on facebook?
How to create slingshot pellets
Keep flowers fresh during transport.
How do I choose the right pumpkin to be turned into a cooler?
To make razor blades sharper after several uses,
To make your house the best for trick-or-treating,
How can you beat a man when playing Rock Paper Scissors?
How can I prevent pulling a muscle while running?
nails
To iron clothes faster.
Protect hands during car repairs.
shelf
To make a simple watch rack out of empty toilet paper rolls, how many rolls do I need?
crayon
how do you use the internet on an iphone?
To measure 1 cup of ingredients without a 1 cup measuring cup,
How can we change and install the lock?
To remove a stuck nail in a wooden board.
To close a zipper,
how do you break a house window?
Increase fuel for hiking trip.
Feed the cow.
How do you increase the volume of a TV with a remote?
To make water run not too fast in a farm setting.
inexpensive softbox
How do I make a casserole?
How to tell if you have bad breath
How can I get my cats to drink more water in my home?
What do you use to make rocket powered Matchbox cars?
How to make a margarita
How can I do Jumping Jacks?
How can I make a mouse trap that doesn't harm the mouse it catches.
How do you clean a litter box?
Clean phone charger terminal.
Keep track of gift card balance.
poster
To avoid getting cavities from sweet foods.
Cut cinnamon rolls without smashing.
How to tell if cake is done baking.
To attach el wire to the structural wire of Bionic El Wire Mask.
Does drinking ice cold water help speed up the rate at which your body burns calories?
how to pick up tiny shards of glass
Remove a screw with a stripped head.
How do I find a workout video to watch
When you are told to 'seperate your egg whites', what do you actually do?
make the egg for the sandwitch
how do you use a card at a vending machine?
How to remove rust from a cast iron pan?
Whom to consult when one is depressed?
To keep frosting on cupcakes looking fresh and pretty.
To peel strips out a cucumber, you can
To affix insulation panels to a wooden frame, you can
Heal sore eyes.
To make your own bright party streamers,
how to make a watermelon-mint dressing
To reliably lure fish without any bait to draw them in,
make simple tuna salad
how to do a grave stone rubbing?
Who can design me a jacket
crossing out
To give a spooky aura to your Halloween Snowman made of pumpkins.
To look like a mermaid while swimming with fins.
To add detail in paint without a brush, you can
To poke holes in leather, you can
Lose weight quickly.
shot glass
Remove squeaky noise from door hinges.
marker
How to remove coconut shell.
how to improve store bought salad dressing?
Where should you sit if you want to survive an airplane Crash?
Keep birds away.
what to flavor pasta sauce with
Make custom heating pad.
What sort of vehicle should be used to haul logs?
How can I separate egg yolk from the white?
To attach one fence rail on top of another, you can
To make the slots for an industrial pencil holder.
To make a trash can smell better in your kitchen?
Remove hair from hair brush.
To mix ingredients to bake,
How can I keep from crying when chopping onions?
How to make Chocolate Candles at home.
What should I do before removing the combustion chamber door of my furnace.
Clean a cast iron cooking pan.
How do you decorate a garden on a budget?
To prevent jello from sticking to plastic, you can
easiest way to cook bacon without burning it.
Store large mop and broom tools.
how do you copy someone's work?
To get the most out of an old jar of condiments,
how do you manage a company?
how to make indian green pea mashed potatoes
how to reuse a grocery bag?
How do you fold ingredients in a recipe?
To freeze the chicken tenders,
peeler
How do I know if my plants need more humidity?
axe
How do you check if a glass bowl will float?
how do you check your heartrate?
To dry candied violets
To open a box,
To clean the lenses of your glasses,
How to mark where to cut a hole for a new window in your vanlife van.
what to roast vegetables on?
Make a stew over a campfire.
How do you place snaps into leather?
How to make citrus juice?
grill
How to stay cool while walking or jogging in the summer?
To dissolve sugar in water
To prevent any type of door from squeaking,
Smile looks forced or weird?
How to tie hair up without a hair tie?
Chef's knife
How to get fluffy scrambled eggs
Reduce time of morning routine.
how to remove jean stains from shoes (jean dye seemed to transfer on to top of shoes)
How do you take the cap off of a bottle of water?
What are some ways to prevent mosquitoes near my home and getting bit?
What is the best paper to use for watercolour painting?
To start growing lettuce, you can
How to upvote a post on Reddit
towel
How to take a multivitamin
How to check your bicycle tire pressure by hand
How can I clean the racks in the oven?
To grind coffee beans in a coffee grinder.
To trace a circle on a piece of a paper, you can
Freshen sticky poker cards.
Prevent deers in garden.
Speed up seed sprouting
how do you refresh your home page on facebook?
get pet home
One seeks to display a hunted animal.
How to change the setting on a fan.
tupperware
How to pick fabric for boots.
How sturdy is the wooden stepstool with a toolbox compartment?
How to plant the moss.
How to seal off humidity on end table.
How do I make a DIY cake release?
How do you get grease off of a stove top?
Make mouthwash with peroxide
pot
How can I get dust and dirt from between the keys of a laptop?
What should I prepare before a soldering project in case something goes wrong.
Polish wood chair.
How to remove label from glass bottle.
Keep head bands organized.
use lubricant to remove a ring
To test if household batteries are still good,
chopsticks
How to paint a wall
How do you prepare turkey before deep fry?
remove deoderant from a shirt
How can I make a stand for my tablet for easy viewing?
How can I hold a bun in place without a hair tie?
Top prepare the baking dish,
How to keep bread from going off?
Test smell of breath.
How do you treat Camallanus Worms in the aquarium?
What is the best way to clean up wood chips and sawdust after using a saw?
How to ensure you cut wood straight and evenly?
How do you cut aluminum entwined hearts?
How do you keep steel wool and cotton dry?
toilet roll
When making a homemade hand warmer what is a good material to put in the pouch?
how to make elvis waffles
tray
how do you use handicap parking?
Make real vanilla extract.
hand
how to make apple-oatmeal cookies
Immediate Care for a finger burn
how to make a southwestern cobb salad
how do you plug headphones into a phone?
jar
To create your own string from scratch, you can
salt
How do you make espresso?
To remove casing from wires, you can
how do you go to sleep at night?
how to make pear and brie croissant
The best way to smooth the edges of a joint.
How to peel garlic.
To prevent cracks and dust in walls with plaster.
bin
how to clean rubber
how to repurpose broken pots
To harden the chocolate lining the cookie cup
chopper
To stop a burning sensation in your mouth due to eating spicy food,
To make condensed soup thinner for gravy.
Give Barbie doll hair dye.
How can you conserve your phone battery and make a low battery last longer?
To make lemonade,
To open the door,
Open a cardboard box that has been taped shut.
saw
Clean legos in washing machine.
How to Prepare Baking Pan for Best Easy Banana Bread
Start doing basic aerobic and cardio exercise
how to get rid of washer smells
paper towel roll
Make a nice candle holder.
soup bowl
How can I keep earrings organized?
How can I make shredded coconut look like lettuce?
Create hanging light fixture.
Keep pits smelling clean without deodorant.
When building a sunroom addition with a cathedral ceiling, where should I put my support beams?
dumptruck
Make sure headlights are aligned.
paper cutter
how do you confine something?
Reduce urge to vomit.
How to dry wood quickly to use in a fire?
How can I cut a pvc pipe?
how to cancel a text
To thaw frozen fish or shrimp
How to Keep Cut Calla Lilies Fresh?
how to keep blanched vegetables bright
Evenly put cookies on a cookie sheet.
To find the perfect temperature to cook pizza at
How to heat coals for a charcoal fire?
Easy non toxic finger painting fun for the kids.
Once your plants have sprouted what time of day should you water them?
how do you pay your cellphone bill over the phone?
To pour the evaporated milk into the bowl,
How to reuse an ink pen if the ink runs out?
newspaper
Make a bird bath for your garden.
how do you give up on something?
To stay warm in the winter for cheaper.
What are some ways to start a condolences letter?
To make an easy and simple boat in the wild,
How do I add a zesty flavor to my tacos?
To make a transparent origami crane.
Hands free eating during intense gaming sessions.
What should I brush Red Lobster biscuits with after removing them from the oven.
to pack your shows inside your suitcase
To easily hold toast while you're driving,
To turn a leather boot inside out, you can
how to keep a pie crust from becoming gummy?
Making your own DIY musical instruments.
How to do a front flip.
How do get magnesium off a magnesium block?
What is a good way to close a sale when the buyer is uncertain?
To get yourself to sneeze when you've accidentally lost it,
How to thread needle.
To make a controlled environment around your child's sand pit,
mixer
How do I cut a copper pipe when working on a plumbing project>
make dirty rice
Remove rust at the bottom of glass beer mugs.
To make the container part for a homemade flask
Learn how to iron a collar when you don't have an iron.
To make presentation for pancakes.
how to store apples and bananas
How can I store empty plastic containers and keep them dry and fresh?
how can you soften butter?
To protect a sheet of paper inside of a binder,
Remove duct tape from mouth.
To stitch fabric so that there are no visible stitches,
How can I clean the inside of a drinking straw?
Germinate seeds to see if they can be planted.
push pin
What are some unisex shoes I can wear
how do you let other cars know you're going to turn?
To prepare the spinach to make spinach ricotta filling.
Prevent ants on front porch.
One wants a carb-heavy medley for dinner?
make oj
To save money on your water bill
How to book a hotel reservation?
To get rid of flaking paint.
To thank your bridesmaids for helping with your wedding,
To mask paint fumes.
To discourage weeds from growing in the garden,
Fit two bowls in a microwave.
How to perform a push-up?
How do you hang a pine cone bird feeder?
How prepare a kamikaze cocktail
how do you rotate something
How to make a temporary tattoo at home?
To retain the heat in a jalapeno pepper for a recipe,
How to cover up nail holes in the wall.
Attach leather strips onto a leather items.
How to make a simple glass feature for a synthetic plant?
To pull a length of paracord underneath and through a loop you've already made, you can
How to cook the pasta?
How do I draw the full size design on the wall when making DIY vinyl wall art?
How should I prepare the chicken breast.
How do you clean dandelions?
Where can I buy a bicycle
stop cats from digging in the garden
How do I get ice cream to scoop out easier from a carton?
To harvest from your home garden.
fingernails
To prepare the ice cream sandwich cake for serving.
How to make a custom mannequin for yourself cheaply.
Add a macro lens to your smartphone.
What is the quickest way to melt a block of wax?
how to remove spray paint from fabric
How can I keep my diamond ring sparkling?
how do you condition your hair?
Easily sort the recycling.
To season a cast iron frying pan,
How can you avoid smashing your thumb while nailing?
What is an easy way to find the exact location of a stud behind dry wall?
To dispose of gasoline safely,
Ingredients for the shell of an avocado yogurt bar.
How to cut fabric to make a ribbon?
To cut a ring out of plywood, you can
Keep fridge smelling fresh.
Make pizza dough
What can I use to water plants
How to safely saw through wood to split it?
How to fold jeans
How can I remove permanent marker stains from carpet?
How do I post photos for other to see
how to open a stuck jar lid still vacuum sealed
To add new music to an MP3 player without paying for it,
how do you put a space between words when you're typing?
To keep pasta shells from sticking to the bottom of a slow cooker
shirt
To shine silverware with items you already have.
What tools do I need to make apple roses?
How can you avoid Poison Ivy when you are outside?
How can I unstop a sink that isn't draining?
To remove blood from clothing
Dry wet electronics.
How to cool down while wearing a sweater.
how to make cinnamon sugar sticks
When making your own bow out of paper, to join the bow together after folding
To moisturize your hands when they are dry,
What do I need to do to get the water ready to boil past?
What should you use to make the base of the paws for your werewolf costume?
How to blend blush while applying make up?
To trim your dogs claws,
To mash potatoes
vise grips
To avoid cracking acrylic when drilling holes in it
To make aioli.
How to form shapes out of wood?
To make easy start flower pots out of household objects,
What ingredients do I need to make Skittles Vodka?
How do I remove candle wax from my clothes?
How to make a cool lightning bug light without hurting the insects.
How to insure the sauce and toppings don't fall off the pizza base when cooking?
To make a knitted rug or blanket with oversized knots
Feed multiple puppies at once.
how to cut thin strips of wood on a table saw
Turn a tshirt into a workout tank.
how to say I don't know nonverbally?
How to unhinge screen door.
How to make butter fluffy.
How can I renew my black leather jacket that looks dull and gray
To hold a nail while hammering it
how do you empty a bucket of items fast?
To convert a word document to a pdf format,
Best fertilizer for rose bushes?
How to create a vintage look on paper?
How do I make my bed?
Shed
How to remove a set in (washed and dried) oil stain on clothes.
Make homemade blood
To protect your head from injury in the event of a bicycle accident,
smartphone
how to make cheddar and chutney toast
Prevent rodents fro biting tree bark.
to stop calls you don't want
To attach hinges to a wooden sewing machine case, you can
how do you see photos your tagged in on instagram?
To hide an alarm system.
How do you re-purpose old shirts?
pitcher
How to secure a paper towel holder?
how do you eat a popsicle
What is the simplest thing you could make a bird feeder out of?
Avoid bugs in drink during picnics.
To avoid spreading infection when working with a wound, you should
To aide the process of power sanding metal.
make fried oreos
box cutter
pickaxe
How can I clean up paint from the carpet?
tide
How to get better traction in a rear wheel drive vehicle?
How to build a sand castle
how do you use chopsticks?
paper cup
To find out if your thermostat is working
To successfully make homemade dough rise after kneading it.
How to easily store hats in a crowded room?
a person
What can I use to wrap up some cookies after I bake them?
How to program a remote garage door opener with a LEARN button?
how to remember the way you came on a hike
How can I weigh down the top of a wooden box while glue dries.
How to make low fat healthy Turkey meat loaf  at home.
how to clean pennies with Coca Cola
What are some reasons you might need to evacuate your home with your bug-out barrel?
How many pounds are there in one stone?
Hit a golf ball.
how do you open a cabinet?
To add a little more flavor to a tomato sauce, you can
how do you set a place for dinner?
How do you add black pepper to a bowl of eggs and cheese?
How to infuse grapefruit flavor into suntea?
how do I identify a falling star
how to make tomato-basil rice
How do you turn off the capital letters on a keyboard?
Use a low toxic mosquito repellent.
How to Make Creamy Mac N Cheese
glass
To give your kid's Christmas gifts if you're poor,
can
dip an oreo without getting milk on your hands
To easily cut all the pieces for an end table out of wood.
To line a flowing clothing item like a cloak
To add a unique flavor to a batch of cake batter,
To add toppings to pizza,
how do you hold a bird correctly?
Keep nail polish from chipping.
plastic bag
How to paint a bike.
To re-purpose a plastic water bottle as an indoor herb pot.
How to switch to shooting with RAW in DSLR Camera?
how to stop a fan belt from squeaking
How to increase the aesthetic appeal of a room?
To reinforce a paper project,
How do I cool chocolate bread before serving?
To keep pests like snails and ants away from your garden.
One seeks to have patterns on their boots.
how do you declutter a house?
Soften hard brown sugar.
how to easily peel garlic cloves
How can Gummy bears make you drunk?
how to make portable fire starters
How to smooth antique radio.
how do you pick up loose glitter?
How to hook up a computer and tablet together.
What is the most important piece in a stud finder?
bottle opener
lysol wipe
One seeks to have low lighting in their room.
To apply a paint of primer to a bike
how do you shovel a driveway of snow?
To open the hood of your primary vehicle.
To shine up furniture without expensive products.
How to polish aluminum for a Back Pack Quick Release Pin
To prevent over spraying spray paint indoors.
how do you pay for a hotel room?
bucket
Reduce interference of melatonin production.
Animal trainer
To open a box of salt,
To make flour tortillas from scratch,
How can I scoop kitty litter out of the box without a litter scooper?
How do you properly freeze cookie dough?
Glue
Create hamster tunnels.
Make a hidden treasure box for fun and collect coins in it.
Make sure a place is optimal for your phone.
how do you "pregame"
make star cookies
How to make a simple ornament for your desk?
trees
penny
Keep the floor clean.
How to decorate a lamp shade colorfully?
To slow down on a bicycle that does not have handlebar breaks,
bottle
How to burp your baby
To avoid contaminated spice containers while handling raw meat,
fire
vise
Jackhammer
What type of flavors are good for ganache?
how to get shiny chocolate garnishes
To Sync bluetooth headphones.
To make a cylinder that can be stuck with toothpicks.
hoe
how to use a compass
how to create a sweet baste for meat
deoderant
how do you dement someone?
To add beads to metal string, you can
How to secure corners of wooden tool crate.
To open a dvd case,
how do you dry your hands with a hand towel?
how do you tighten a seatbelt?
funnel
One seeks to make chicken like Chick-Fil-A.
how do you set the hits goal on mturk?
hands
How can I get closer to trees when I ride my riding mower?
how to use baking soda for a deep clean on the sofa
To send a letter via the mail,
How do I cut the strips of fleece ?
Make a rug for the bathroom.
how to make an herbed egg sandwich
How do you identify a queen bee by activity level?
How do I spread a glaze over chocolate peppermint brownies?
How to sharpen knife.
how do I make salmon and warm pesto potato?
Make a neat place to write notes in kitchen.
To apply dye to leather
To restore fluffiness in pillows.
To clean a cast-iron skillet
To re-stuff a pillow that has flattened out,
To properly clean an oily face.
To remove the pressurized can of homemade dog food from the pressure canner
How do I structure a resume?
how to clean a sink aerator
gloves
Make a soap scrubber.
how to find the Corvus constellation
How to heat oil in a pan.
How to flatten a metal bottle cap?
One wants to practice yoga on the run.
How to open a new browser tab on Chrome
how to clean a ceiling exhaust fan
how to remove a tick
To get an annoying song out of your head.
To cut candle wax into smaller pieces you can
To give skin made to look injured for a Halloween costume a blotchy look.
What can you rinse the yoga mat in to ensure it's clean and to prevent it from being slippery?
To bolt the plant saucer and the bucket together.
For an inexpensive book holder
To make a meal with little effort,
A tree trimmer
Easiest way to make a stencil for screen printing.
To make a section of fishing line sturdier and thicker, you can
How can I hide my emergency money when I am travelling or away from home?
bat
To make a cake firmer and easier to cut, you can
how to clean a cast iron skillet
How can you get rid of blood in fabric that has been there a long time?
How do you prepare celery for cooking or eating?
Clean gunk from pools.
How can I disinfect leggos?
How should I beat this dough?
You want to get more ketchup in those little ketchup cups.
Measure one serving of spaghetti noodles quickly.
To protect your eyes from sun damage,
magnet
Remove rain water from wet cat.
To fertilizer plants for free
Make a makeup holder for travel.
How do you prep an old painted ladder?
To find yeast in the wild,
How do I plate a goat cheese white sauce pasta once it has been combined?
How do I decorate a pine cone Christmas tree?
To attach a magnet to a wooden keyholder, you can
how do you clean excess glitter of a paper?
how do you jeapordize something?
To fix a DVD that is skipping and not playing properly,
To make an ice pack that won't drip as it melts,
How do I prevent my mirror from developing black spots?
how to make basic liquid soap
How long to cook the pizza for
What is the best way to serve chicken salad?
hand
How can you learn something new?
Make ginger turmeric tea
To stop flies from being around.
To be sure to remember that you locked the door before a trip
cut dry wall to fit
To  survive in a desert.
what is a good way to cool yourself off in summer?
To have a healthy breakfast,
Keep a fresh jar of garlic covered when the lid is lost.
Flatten slab of dough.
how to make dulce de leche petits fours
make chocolate ice cream
How do I use a tin can to melt wax shavings?
How to get lead out of a large pencil.
how to acquire an mturk task?
how to make curried rice
Where can I buy a DSLR camera
How to help someone learn fractions?
socket
Make a warm neck cloth for your pets neck.
peanut butter cookie recipe
cut fringes along the bottom of a tshirt
What toots do you need to build a mini coffin?
kerchief
How to search for a location on Google Maps
How can I buff finger prints off stainless steel appliances?
To tear tissue paper to be used in a project, you can
To allow for even cooking over a campfire.
how to make ham and marmalade toast
How do I properly soak chickpeas before using them?
make a shelf that uses three screws level
How to reply to an email on gmail
how do you infuse fruit?
How can I get popcorn to be a little sweeter when making it homemade?
how do you create an instructable?
How to easily hang something with unique and specific holes in the back.
To make apple slices flexible so they can be rolled
how do I make citrus pancakes?
How to stop a door from opening and closing with wind gusts?
stick
How to increase a room's temperature with shades
To control stretch marks during pregnancy,
how do you check notifications on the facebook app?
My iPhone earbuds aren't working right.
To protect yourself from mosquito bites,
magazine
pot
How to make Vegetarian vegetable Stew
Peel a banana.
how do you use a blanket?
To make roast pork belly
To tell when the corn bread is done cooking
To cut the top of a pumpkin off,
Prevent icing from drying.
how to make almond butter with mixed berries toast
How can I get a dent out of wood?
How to like a video on Youtube
What is the best way to take a picture at a ball game when you are far from the action?
How to make Chocolate meringue angel clouds at home.
blade
How to Multiply the Tables of 6, 7, 8, and 9 in Your Hands
how do you partake in something?
Help me get rid of the frogs and toads in my garden.
To cook quinoa
milk
Make your own hot dog sauce
How to remove odor from a shaker bottle?
Read book faster.
Clean a dusty car dash.
make easy boiled chicken
how to remove seeds from a pomegranate
fingernail
Keep the backyard nice and clean.
How can you add new life to old tights?
How to cut a new center plank for your picnic table?
To harvest corn,
How to float in the ocean
Dams
To close retractable window awnings,
To attach pieces of steel plate together sturdily.
where do I find the Vega start
mold
Make your own custom size envelope.
To patch an inner tube,
What ingredients do I need to make homemade Taco Spice?
how do you dispose of a cutip?
To install a hard drive into a PC.
how to cook multiple quasadillas at once
Make new crayons from old.
How do I spread frosting on a creamy chocolate toffee torte?
Heat food in hotel with microwave.
To remove the apple core for pi day pie
Make rainbow ice cubes.
Structuring a Study Group
how do you exit out of a browser on a macbook?
make bread crumbs
To shill white wine without watering it down
How to prevent damage to a TV remote over time?
What can I do with my leaves to make them easier to put on the curb?
to make cardboard pieces thicker
Make yoga mat holder.
How do you plant potatoes?
how do you use face id to open an app on an iphone?
To cut perfect slices of cheesecake.
How do I decide where to put the eye holes in the mask?
how to keep your trashbag in place?
To strain out the seeds of blended strawberry sorbet.
To find cover art for illegally burned dvds.
how do you pause a song on spotify?
How do I clean off a cranberry stain from my clothes?
How much bleach can you add to make drinking water safe?
How can you tell if you have bad breath or not?
picture
To apply small amounts of detail to a painted nail, you can
how to make hoppin john rice
duffel bag
To make washing your hair easier,
How do you reinvigorate dried and brittle birch bark?
fork
Keep track of daily water intake.
How to pick up a piece of fruit using a fork?
to be selfish?
how do you sample some wine?
How to child proof a trampoline
Make a dryer ball.
Remove scuffs from shoes.
how to soften brown sugar
rid the meat of the smell of blood
One seeks to have a cleaner kitchen.
Shine silver without silver polish.
How can I ease Athaletes feet?
When on a date the best way to judge a person's character
tablet
rag
To harvest herbs from my home garden.
What is something I can use to make circles out of my dough?
To make fence posts that aren't permanent.
How can I make my own chip clips at home?
To soften butter quickly.
To prevent pen ink from drying out in the tip of a pen,
To prevent noisy kitchen sinks
How to strike a match on your teeth
How can you safely remove a fuse from a fuseholder?
microwave
how to make creole green beans
plastic toys
Clean your flat top stove
To mix milk with dry ingredients, like flour
mouth
make ginger juice
What do you need to do for the mixture to thicken?
To type this symbol ÷ on a keyboard.
to find your contact lens dropped on the floor
How can I open the coke can?
How do I begin creating wall art with electrical tape once I have my materials?
Make jump rope handles.
What type of syrup is used with homemade mars bars?
Make a nutritious breakfast drink.
For campfire french toast
In order to slice homemade bread,
How can I avoid fumes when painting a room?
how to remove the peel from an apple
mittens
Increase light exposure for indoor plants.
how do you push someone?
Decorate your cake pops after they are dipped and cooled.
Collect rain water.
What are the fastest vegetables to grow?
To give a baby goldfish crackers that aren't as hard to eat,
To not lose track of your wallet.
How do you make a fly trap?
To tell if your eggs are fresh or not.
To make sure paper mache merges with the cardboard structure of a cosplay mask.
how do you cramp something?
Remove dust from car crevices.
To make an easy Halloween decoration,
What can be used to add details to a paper mache mask?
What can I use to detox
How can I decorate a thumb tack with buttons?
To combine a knife with a flash light for a survival situation.
Grow your own pumpkins for Halloween.
how to bake a pie
How should you cut Brussels Sprouts for roasting in a pan?
how do you charge someone?
How to warm food using microwave
How to best fix a wobbly leg of of a table?
How can I dry clothes in my basement?
how do you make detox strawberry water?
crack eggs without getting shells in food
To make your hair grow thicker and faster,
For pocket-sized rice hand warmers, what kind of thread should I use?
How to remove the drumstick from a whole chicken?
D.i.Y candle wick using string, wax, a pair of pliers and a pair of scissors.
How to practice
How do I pipe batter when making macarons?
If you are making hummus and don't have tahini on hand, you can
To sweeten a dish without directly adding sugar
To make an omelette with more than just eggs.
What should you do to avoid bringing in bedbugs with your shoes?
How to laser cut plywood coasters.
how to make squash and orzo salad
How do I clean a copper pipe after it is deburred when working on a plumbing project?
How do I clean my wood floor?
To play a flag in your yard to display,
lighter
hook
To peel garlic easily.
how do I make infused olive oil?
hair pick
To reduce the sodium in instant Ramen packets,
Mak a Customer Feel Welcomed
To make sure weaved felt does not come loose as you sew.
To clean a cast iron skillet,
To flatten a plastic bag, you can
How to make a stencil.
To prepare the dutch oven for baking,
remove a sheet of lined paper from a notebook
Make a water fountain with a hose
How to test the fit of your beer barrel?
When you meet someone for a first time and exchange business cards with him/her, what should you do to remember the face?
Use a piping bag
hook
What is the best thing to wear with a vintage tunic?
To keep ants away from your food during a picnic,
How do I properly clean my vehicle?
how do you make a potato soft?
how do you set a clock?
how do you spread your legs?
Make gift card holder.
How can you make tasty bacon pancakes at home?
To make a case for your chess set
Open a wine bottle with a corkscrew
Make a scarf and belt holder.
How can I protect my car door from getting scratched and chipped by my garage walls?
To remove moisture from a whole turkey before deep frying,
How to remove scratch from the glass?
How can you air dry bottles with what you already have on hand?
microwave bowl
How to attach gunghur bells to rope to make a bracelet.
plastic figure
To cut and shape the naan dough for cooking.
Paint the chandler
How can I clean the dust from knick knacks?
how do you use a tent?
whiteboard
To get your coffee to taste sweeter.
One wants to harness the power of nature for aesthetic reasons.
make someone laugh
What texture should the paste be when making hanging yarn ball art?
How to cook rice so it is fluffy.
How can I protect a board from burn marks while etching?
how to charge riding mower battery
Cut intricate designs from cardboard.
How can I fill the pond I just made in my backyard?
How to clean a stove top.
To make a ladder for climbing a tree,
To open an envelope and reseal it.
To be able to legally drive on roads in the USA,
How do you neutralize the acidic solution made from microwaving vinegar and sucrose when making homemade quantum dots?
How do you bring a pot of water on the stove to a full rolling boil?
How can I make a cheap air freshener?
How to make fan spin again?
How to adhere letters to felt garment.
how to make icing
To cover a violet in egg white
hose
Easy way to dry the bottom of your boots in the house..
how do you keep food warm in a car?
water
Take tarnish off brass.
how do you knock over a bowling pin?
To marinate pork with sweet and sour sauce for cooking.
Kevlar
To figure out how much your dog weighs,
To put on the earring,
How to make a regular can a garden watering can?
torch
Clean a bike chain
how do you collapse a tent?
To create a sturdy base for a rain barrel, you can
Easily clean grease off  backsplash tiles behind stove.
How to curb your dog?
Buy fresh ice cream container.
How do I write love notes
How can I get more comfortable in bed when I am about to go to sleep?
To see some unique sites while on an exotic vacation,
how to choose flowers to candy for eating
Keep pizza warm after picking up carry out.
To attach a wire to a piece of fabric, you can
How can I tell if strawberries are ripe at the store?
To destroy any when they've taken over your kitchen.
Avoid injury during an earthquake.
To open up a sealed bedroom door.
How do I keep my freezer smelling fresh?
Make small biodegradable flower pot.
chalk
How to remove wallpaper.
How do you crease a piece of paper.
How do you prepare a margarita glass?
Prevent mold on bathroom ceilings.
To clean a smoking pipe,
tupperware
how do you make your car windows dark?
To make cake dough more fluffy and moist,
napkins
how to roast garlic
What is the best way to start when cleaning your room?
Make glass cups shiny.
When adding parmesan to spaghetti, you should
To turn strawberries into a paste, you can
Get a perfect line of eyeliner.
Make a shamrock milkshake at home.
To get the bad smell of onions out of the kitchen after baking.
How to Inspire Students
What should you do to prevent someone from stealing your bag if you are taking a nap on public transit?
find fun toppings for ice cream.
how do you make a hot dog?
How can I remove a water stain from an oak table top?
What can be stored on a garden storage bench?
How do I make a logo design
how do you scald your body?
Make muscle soothing bath.
Create a fishing pole.
how to make yogurtwiches
How to make Caramel peanut butter spread.
Make an all-purpose carpet cleaner.
How do you remove hard water stains from stainless steel?
To make sure meat doesn't heat up to much when grinding for sausage making.
To dry herbs
To get vegetables to grow better in your garden.
To dampen the noise from obnoxious children's toys without ruining the kid's fun,
how to clean cast iron skillet
how do you get releasd from jail on parole?
Quickly scrape ice from tires.
how to make spiced rice pilaf
What type of box do you use for the Riddler Device creation?
How can I get a zipper unstuck?
Receive packages when living at a sketchy location.
how to make smoked salmon toast
How can you make a space saver rack in your garage?
How should I roll out my door when making Thanksgiving rolls?
How can I clean off the top of my stereo?
how do you kill a tick?
How do you make drinks cold quickly?
Protect door knobs from paint job.
Who does a princess marry
How to Make Slingshot Straw Rockets for a Kids Engineering Project
Making quick easy bat decorations.
To level up attack first in Zelda II for the NES.
To make grocery shopping easier without a list,
How to make Delicious Dewberry Ice Cream at home.
fingers
To make sure you wake up at the proper time,
To make a taco,
How can you get a free disposable carrying cozy for outdoor picnics?
mouth wash
To help dry out shoes when they are wet from rain,
how to choose a good basketball to play with.
How do I get dog poop off my shoes?
To remove oil from carpet.
ice pick
To find a bow to learn the basics of archery with
To tell when pork is done frying, you should
how do you scrape something?
how can I safely and quickly cut small fruits or veggies? (like grapes or cherry tomatoes)
How can I repel mosquitoes?
make puzzle into pic
how do you forge someone's signature?
How can I lose weight?
how to make homemade bread crumbs
How do I add something to my cart online
rock
to find screws and rings dropped on the floor
How adjust a loose door handle.
To ensure the pork is juicy after cooking it in the oven
To seal a pvc pipe to its top cap, you can
How do you stain wood?
To prevent snow from building up on your shovel.
to make a dog frozen treat
Make prop weapons.
To install the musical note charms on a music stave bracelet,
What bait can I use to catch a mole?
To prevent overfilling the pots with the brownie batter
tupperware
Where is the T-virus container from?
what to replace shallots with?
Cleaning your car rims and tires.
To heal chapped lips when they are developing,
paper cup
One seeks to keep the lamp all together.
How to clean a chopping board without chemicals.
How do you clean a television screen?
How can you get gum out of your hair?
How do you fill up your car?
What material is used to make the outer shell?
socket
To dig a hole in the ground,
To get free food on your birthday.
how do you cremate something?
Add tangy flavor to meat.
stand
To completely neutralize the heat sensation from spicy food
How to transport furniture without any damage?
How can you make easy wall art decor?
How to unpin a program from the start menu in Windows 10
One wants to make their rims aesthetically pleasing.
Find out the salary of a new job without asking in the interview.
wood
How to Wake up in a Good Mood
how ot mkae you rown playdoh
How do you get yellow stains out of clothing?
What parts of a Yucca plant should you harvest?
How do I buff the scratches out of my brown leather wallet.
Prevent spread of cold sore on bed.
how to remove salt deposits on a leather jacket
To encourage gentle dreams while sleeping at night,
comb
chopper
How to cut vegetable
How to put in a screw
to use laundry bottles for garage storage.
To find a Word file that closed without saving,
Add more nutrition to pasta sauce.
Store multiple towels.
Power wash hard to reach places.
dish towel
people
To make your yard more inviting for birds,
How to install a new wiper on your car.
How do I prepare ramekins to bake a creme brulee?
Prevent discoloration inside oven.
how to find lupus constellation
ice pick
To improve your physical fitness,
How do you hit a baseball?
To sharpen a knife,
Cool wine without ice.
How do you properly roll out dough?
How do you end a phone call kindly?
keep jewelry tangle-free and organized during the move
How do you bend freshly cut wire to the side without hurting yourself?
To preserve roadkill fur.
rock
how to store herbs and greens
To make clay easier to stretch, you can
Keep sand out for play pen at beach.
How do I compare cheap airline tickets on multiple websites?
How do I plan out the design for DIY vinyl wall art with software?
Scissors
keys
how do you pat someone?
If trapped in the wilderness, is food or water more important?
how do you shuffle cards?
To thaw out chicken without getting salmonella poisoning,
To close a small, but deep wound off,
How to make bubble snake makers
bottle opener
measure dry ingredients
What material does a trestle style use.
How to Prevent Heat Exhaustion
how to make crav-salad cups
knees
plastic wrap
How do you scare your sister with green army men?
How to thread a sewing needle.
how do you cover flaws on your face?
helmet
To ensure chicken is cooked all the way through,
How can you tell if you are in a room with a one way or 2 way mirror?
water bottle
To cut veggies efficiently.
To decorate hot chocolate before you serve it.
How to make mulberry syrup at home.
razor
hair tie
How to make a shirt look unique?
How to fix a necklace.
What is the first step when staining the wood?
penny
How do you know you'll need to replenish your staple supply?
Reduce cleaning time of house floors.
tongs
how do you make home made deer jerky?
To dry potatoes after frying,
Clean bathroom tiles.
Untangle rug fringes.
Rinse food without removing flavor.
How do you separate the fibers harvested from the leaves of a Yucca plant?
How can I rake leaves?
To keep knee high boots in top shape.
How to I finish the pavlova cookies once they been assembled?
How can you thwart people trying to "borrow" or steal your ink pens at work or home?
Apply eye liner
how to make a hearty tuna salad
To keep a cake from sticking to the pan when it's done cooking.
make hamburgers in air fryer
How can I get a marble effect on nails?
Get rid of a mouse in the kitchen.
how do you shoot a gun?
How to keep a shower curtain or glass doors clean.
Hold multiple wrenches.
What is a natural way to get rid of ants?
Clean the bathtub.
How do you melt chocolate?
How can you appear bigger in a photograph?
How do you remove the legs from a stool?
To make sure a mold for candy doesn't leak when it's in the freezer
Label and organize your power cords
To attach pages of a book together, you can
to make a local water sprinkler for kids
How can you use electrical tape in a small space?
How to find a lost dog?
How can I get the bottom of a pan to stick less?
how do you win at tic-tac-toe
How to make a good bleach.
How to prepare the fish for easy salmon fillets in less than 10 minutes
how do you stock up on something?
Can I do a kids art project with leftover cooked spaghetti noodles?
How do you clean the sole of white shoes?
To make mashed potatoes that are creamier and tastier,
How to heat chocolate pudding.
How to never misplace your keys?
two coins
How to fold a bedsheet?
How do you ripen bananas?
What can I give my Mom that she'll like and is cheap?
To get the wrinkles out of a nice shirt.
To clean a foggy mirror and keep the fog off for a couple weeks
To open a door when both of your hands are full.
How To Make a Liquid Hourglass
make dog comfortable
To safely catch a butter fly to look at and then release,
how to keep garlic from burning when sauteing?
how do you highlight something?
water
How to glue pictures of comics to table cover.
To make homegrown tomatoes sweeter.
mousse
keys
To affix carpet tiles together when making a DIY rug.
paper clip
Remove cloudy, white spots from wooden furniture.
How do you use to apply wood lacquer to wood art piece?
To dry the turkey removing all the excess moisture
Make an impromptu green house for starting cuttings.
how do i open a beer bottle without an opener?
roast garlic
how to store seasoned salt
How do you season a cast iron skillet?
how do you buckle into a car?
How do you begin to clear a clogged toilet?
How do you choose what video game to buy?
How do you clean ear wax out of earbuds?
How to dice a potato quickly.
Plant herbs against a wall.
How to Avoid Ingrown Toenails
piece of wood
fork
how to transfer words to wood
How can you make the top of a desk dry erase?
One wants an easy airplane to make for their kids.
Building a potted shed.
how to keep dough from tasty like raw dough
how do you sit kids inside of a car?
how do you find the volume of a cylinder
How do you measure the temperature of a loaf of bread to ensure it has been thoroughly cooked?
How to easily open a lid.
What can be used to make an arrow?
a person
How do you remove the CPU from a motherboard.
Remove masking tape without leaving residue.
To heat up soup for eating.
Remove excess juice from tomatoes.
To prepare a turkey for roasting,
How to make a fishing spear?
make crisp french fries
To naturally ease chest congestion.
how do you hunch your back?
How to Set up a Fundraising Event
To increase speed and endurance while running,
How do you keep dust from accumulating on fan blades?
can opener
To store pie after you make it in the oven for dinner.
To prevent a light leak in a homemade camera, you can
microwave
bobby pin
How to trick birds so they ignore your strawberries?
how to create a curved winged eyeliner
screws
how do you keep a tattoo dark?
To light a fire easily without dry material,
plastic bag
Freeze fresh avocado
How can I keep a bandana in place in my hair?
how do you find ursa major
To improve the texture of your hair naturally,
To prevent over shopping at the grocery store,
To cut up the soda can to make a bow ring from it.
How can you creep your neighbors out this winter?
how to use a straw?
paper
How can you ensure the flow of water goes down into a pond?
To make angel food cake,
vase
How would you attach leather to a metal surface?
Remove dirty rosin from violin bow.
pan
hair pick
how to remove foreign object from a babies mouth
How to seal a small hole in the wall?
Make a shade play area for kids.
How to make Italian Beef soup
To make planters from old blue jeans.
How do I prepare a laser printer toner cartridge for refilling it the easy way?
cardboard
To avoid over cooking your cookies,
How can I clean the face of my watch?
To prevent your shoes from getting wet,
How to use a slingshot
Following a Healthy Sleep Routine
how to wilt spinach
How can I ease the sting of a bee?
how to flush a toilet
Make carved pumpkin last longer.
To finish a half marathon,
Avoid cleaning when eating snacks.
how do you make a milkshake?
To fry steak medium rare
How to make Chocolate Pudding at home on your stove.
How to use a credit card
How to fix a stuck window.
How can I make gummy candy at home?
Make a wall to do list.
use black soap safely
How to start a mower that has no oil in it.
What do you need to make avocodo yogurt bars?
How do I write my friend a message on the sidewalk outside of his house?
how to be quiet?
eyeglasses
Make own baby wipes.
Sun tea
How can I activate yeast for baking?
To trace a drawing.
To change the color fo the frosting from white to brown
How to stop a table from wobbling at home.
To reheat Chinese food.
Give car tires traction.
Hide items in a plant pot.
To put keys on your key ring without chipping nails.
nail
To clean an Xbox 360 controller,
how do you weigh produce at a grocery store?
To print out a page of stickers.
mouth
Stop a running horse.
How do I prepare tomatoes for use as a hamburger topping
To make it so that sugar will stick to ramekins, you can
wite-out
Make hot chocolate without powder.
Make a lightweight frame of a car.
How can i make my own southwest seasoning?
How do you  prep to make Cool Candied Cucumber?
how do you blow your nose?
To bake biscuits with enough space on the baking sheet for them to expand as they cook.
How to cut your lace collar to make a necklace?
How can I easily cut ends off frozen tube treats?
Keep camping gear dry.
To maintain a coarse and chunky consistency for salsa.
How do I finish sharpening the blade?
What materials and tools are needed to make a riveted cereal box top hat?
To make a makeshift phone speaker,
Use cutting board in tight spaces.
How do you store birch bark after it has been removed from a birch tree?
How I cook the egg in the same wok that sausage and vegetable are cooking ?
how do you get out in dodgeball?
To do a pushup
how do you trap something?
easiest way to thinly slice meat.
To make an easy, no-mess paint toy for kids,
Prevent cold sores.
How to make Sour Apple Beeswax Candles at home
How to unclog a sink.
To kill the weeds in your lawn,
how to keep hydrangeas from wilting
piece of paper
How to make Orange Chocolate Fudge at home.
Free and common material to use as insulation.
Make toilet seat warm.
butter knife
To age cedar wood
how do you refuse something?
teeth
To allow hard candy to harden to it's final form after baking it, you can
To obtain a cutting from a living plant, you can
how to make french vanilla eggnog
How to attach clay pots together?
How do I put the the reinforcement wire into the concrete ?
Buy women's swimsuit without getting oversized.
spoons
Decorate plain vases.
To make a color of oil paint lighter,
how to keep chopped vegetables from becoming slimy
How can I poke the hole in a cardboard pinhole camera?
What type of oil should be used to make a glass bottle oil lamp?
To improve morning sickness naturally,
Toast a hamburger bun
To make foam pieces used in cosplay easier to fold.
How do I check to see if my plants need water?
To allow the cookies to completely set and firm up
How do I make my pancakes stick less to the griddle?
Sew your own curtain.
How do I find lost things on the floor?
When grooming a dog what tool should you use to cut the hair?
How to design marquee letter sign
How do you infuse fruit into water?
What kind of spider is best for a decorative spider web?
Prevent pain from rocks when camping.
ant 
Squeeze out all of toothpaste.
to make beer taste better
How to shred old documents.
how do you show an officer you're valid to drive?
How can I keep leaves from polluting my outdoor koi pond?
How do I use citric acid to clean a coffee pot?
What is the best cleaning solution for white tennis shoes?
paperweight
How do you kick a kickball?
Which part of a bird can be used as a form of pen?
fire
pliers
How do you water a cranberry plant?
How to make a fruit smoothie
How does a dial test indicator work?
How do you make ice cubes?
To eat a cupcake with an equal balance of cake and frosting,
how do you solve a puzzle?
To eat an apple entirely without skipping the core,
Kives
To make sure your internet is working properly to stream to twitch.
How can men protect their faces from effects of sun's rays?
Speed up freezing bottle.
How do you remove a nail from a board?
what is the best advise to give a beginner cook?
How to Overcome Shyness with Girls
To make onions more sweet in their flavor,
mouth
vise grip
What's the best way to dry my clothes
vine
How can I clean my shoes
Prevent glasses from fogging at the spa.
To use a face mask.
To keep the fabric flower petal folds in place while cutting excess fabric.
How do you remove rust from a cast iron skillet?
To level out the sides of a wooden box, you can
To calm down a stomach without taking an Aspirin,
screwdriver handle
how do you double something?
How to dispose of die after tie dyeing?
How to shape an old sawzall blade into a knife blade.
Remove residue from flat iron.
To get the "smart" part of a smart TV working.
Remove mold from wood
vase
how to thicken chili and give it a slight flavor boost
To decorate a sand castle in a safe way,
How can I keep dirty shoes away from clean ones in the closet?
how to make a non-toxic paint with egg and chalk
How to flush your radiator in your car.
microscope
How can I get rid of early morning hunger cravings without eating and won't keep me up?
Find materials for a fire in an urban setting.
how do you sterilize a needle?
How to quickly and easily shuck corn?
mittens
how do you dunk something?
Make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
How to access home screen settings in android
How to melt the solid chocolate quickly?
How to place floater in rapeseed oil solution in mason jar.
To survive in the wilderness.
toilet tissue
eyeglasses
Clean between keyboard keys.
underwear
how to prepare ramekins for baking.
How to inflate a car tire.
How to remove the membrane from the back of a rack of ribs.
To trim a sheet of paper
how to easily strain citrus juice
to prevent blisters on your heels
to make sure chicks do not stick to the egg while developing in the egg in the incubator
To mark the center location on a sheet of a metal, you can
Mount a small item with accuracy.
To line a wooden drawer with felt,
hoist
To get paper to stay together when rolled in a tube, you can
Prevent moisture in closet.
Turn the propane torch on
freshen fabric funiture.
How do you make sure a shelf is straight before hanging it?
What should be used to flatten the cookie balls before baking?
To make holes in the cap of a water bottle for a sprinkler.
TO do the moonwalk,
How do I meal plan for the week
How to remove Fat and Oil-based Stains from carpet?
When constructing paper planting pots, what is a good object to use as a template for the shape?
how to make flour last longer?
tape
To prevent the pie crust edges from burning in the pumpkin pie bread
Keep trackpad of laptop smooth.
how do you open a vegetable can?
To walk through a snow covered path without getting too wet,
Clean old jewelry.
Hammer a nail into a piece of wood that will split.
Easiest way to peel tomatoes?
How to water a tomato plant.
How to dress when working with insulation.
To create eyes out of clay for a face you are making, you can
How to get your white clothes as clean as possible.
how do you use the exclamation point on a keyboard?
What can I use for garnish once my burritos are cooked ?
record
Stretch Out Tight Shoes
How to resume a video on youtube on your browser
Tighten a screw.
Check to see how stretchy the material is
clay
How do I sharpen a knife.
To prepare a mix to make an omelette.
To make a folding table.
How to peel a banana like a monkey
How can you protect your hearing when working with a saw?
Store baby pacifiers.
To make a water balloon that will pop when it hits someone instead of just bouncing off
Carry multiple clothes when moving.
How to fold a bedsheet?
how do you bake something?
how do you make seasoned fries?
Make drinking glasses.
To make an invisible bookshelf.
To cook chicken until it is completely done,
To make your own buttermilk using whole milk for the corn bread
how do you use the pound symbol using a laptop keyboard?
how to do body weight squats?
how do you decide something?
When working with wood glue, it is important to remember that
To connect wire together, you can
a ribbon
cup
How to crush oreos using the food processor.
What is a good way to clean a metal necklace?
What kind of apples can I use for applesauce?
To avoid fake check scams, business should instead
What is the best way to punch through a brick?
How can I safely melt two plastics together?
To reduce tartness of tomato sauce,
To flatten and stretch a coin to increase it's size, you can
How to refill a hole in your garden
How long does it take to create pickled peppers?
crazy glue
Clean off the table to remove debris.
Allow for even heat when grilling skewers.
Zipper keeps falling down?
how do you cut your finger nails?
To trace a stencil onto wood,
How do I prep the valve cover of my engine to paint it?
How do you choose the size of a motor to use in a bee vacuum?
Reduce spread of plant disease in garden.
How to discipline a puppy.
Where is the best place to grow my tomatoes?
how to make a min bagel sandwich
how to make your hand plane glide better
What does a woman need to do to legally use her husbands last name?
Prepare for a speech
How can you freshen your kitchen in a couple of min?
Fry your eggs perfectly
Make your own key ring.
how to easily curl your lashes
To replace batteries in the game gear.
Can I make fudge in five minutes?
To make a packet of instant noodles healthier,
To make a disc sander for a lathe durable enough.
How to create a hidden storage space in a room
How do I make sure that my cookies don't stick to the cookie sheet?
to protect a Christmas ornament in storage
How do you care for an edema?
how do you make a birthday cake wish?
Make a tire sandbox.
To find an easy way to complete levels on a video game,
Roast a pepper
how do you recite vows?
What is the best time to eat lunch
grater
How do you make Sun Tea?
Clean out your microwave
D.I.Y wet wipes with essence, tea tree oil and unscented body wash.
How to clean a pot after cooking rice?
How can I make my clothes smell fresher in between washes?
To transfer a design to be etched on a sheet of acrylic.
To prevent getting your hand burned when driving an automatic car on a hot day,
How do I cut out the bottom of the clay pot ?
To trim heritage raspberry bushes at the end of the season,
How do you tie off crochet?
How to mix oranges for painting a sunset.
What kind of metal should I use for the knifes blade?
What is an easy way to get rid of weeds before they get too big?
How do you put salt around the rim of a margarita glass?
To make a dirty pot easier to clean,
How do I catch the water that falls out from a copper pipe after cutting it when working on a plumbing project?
Heal piercing wound.
To attach an outlet plate to a wall, you can
How to trace baby's foot.
how do you read a message on facebook messenger?
How to fold socks
how to make a milkshake
how to make chicken tomatillo tacos
Recycle a pop can
how to keep dates, from becoming gummy?
To clean up an old piece of wood, you can
To make a smore,
how do you use a butterfly keyboard?
To remove stains from white fabric,
To store the homemade butter cookies
To firmly affix a strip of LEDs into a wooden box, you can
To tell if a baked dish is done cooking, you can
To scrub a pan,
a person
To toast the sliced roll for the pizza bread
To find a fire starter that won't be affected by rain.
paperclip
To part a straight part in hair
how to make chipotle pork tacos
Eliminate dust bunnies from computer case.
sledgehammer
Clean inside vase.
What materials and tools are needed to make a carpet broom?
How to shoot a basketball
tarp
A wooden bat
How do I treat my leather strap before weaving it ?
water
How do you remove gel nail polish?
shoe
razor
How to easily peel a head of garlic?
electric mixer
How can I check if an appliance is properly receiving power from an outlet?
To change a router WiFi password
To wick water into a plastic bottle planter.
how to calculate GPA
Prevent mosquitoes from porch at night.
How do I make my coffee sweeter?
To play baseball,
To gel chia seeds and keep them from clumping.
How do I set up my charcoal grill for indirect heat ?
To attach small pieces of brass to a piece of wood, you can
how to make italian blt
Make a car tablet holder.
How do you rinse a bowl of blueberries?
Collating device
How to Make an Easy terrarium
mold
How do you protect the cover of an old book?
how to hold nails to make them easily accessable
How to dry fresh basil.
How to safely cut an avocado.
what makes something an omnivore?
What is the best gun to keep my home safe?
To prevent a ceramic plate from breaking while it's being drilled, you can
How to clean a smelly garbage disposal.
plant onions
What can I add to my cookies to make them tastier?
Prepare crispy watermelon.
To make the doorbell trigger a guard dog bark when pressed.
To store a flag in the Winter when not using it.
how do you pop a balloon?
To tap an uncooperative piece of flooring into place
Make napkin rings.
What can I do to cool a lemon merengue pie?
Duct Tape Wart Removal
To light a hard to reach candle wick
How can I preserve the condition of my cashmere sweater?
thumb tack
Are you always tripping over your tent lines because you don’t see them until you’re right there?
How can I keep ants out of a pet food bowl?
how to make peach tea using peach nectar
where is the Scutum constellaiton located
How can you be sure you get the best price on a product from Amazon, even after you bought the item?
How to make silver shine.
To measure the length and width of a piece of cardboard
how do you execute someone?
How do I boil my eggs and prep for egg salad?
how do you spit?
How can I make a bandanna for a dog?
how do you take a nap?
how to make pink grapefruit punch
To cook sausages without them popping,
how do you keep your phone screen from cracking if you drop it?
How can you clear rust off a screw or nut head?
To color seltzer water blue.
soldering iron
To encourage your child to behave better,
Prevent taco shell from falling.
How can I more naturally fall asleep?
Prevent cats from digging in trash can.
What can I use for a solid platform that allows liquid to drain?
How to light a candle.
How to mark wood measurements.
To replace eggs in a recipe.
Stinky clothes hamper
Making the legs
To install a drive in a laptop.
Reduce risks of heart disease.
How can I soften chocolate for cooking?
To join the two halves of the wooden squat rack to increase stability.
How can you make thread as light as possible?
To keep your kid's rooms clean without constantly demanding that they clean up,
To tell when yeast is done, you can
What can protect me from hail
how do you filter speech?
how to get bugs from top of swimming pool
eyes
What material should I use for a durable survival bracelet?
how do you conquer something?
How to you weight down a crust so it doesn't puff up while cooking?
how do you use shaving cream?
rag
Make lemon water
To park correctly on an upward hill.
safety pin
To cut a triangle out of a piece of wool, you can
How to clean glass windows.
make candy bar donut pops
How do I create the cream cheese mixture for cherry cheesecake twists?
open a container of marshmallow fluff that is stuck
How do you make a chewy cookie when baking?
To ensure that rubber tubing stays in place on a wooden post, you can
Make a mason jar terrarium
To peel garlic.
Pose for camera with great smile.
How to hook up your new WIFI modem.
How do you know when to flip a pancake?
To add a sturdy inner layer to a tote bag that requires no sewing.
an anchor
preventing burned garlic while sauteing
Make turmeric milk
How to sew a straight stitch for mending a pillowcase seam by hand?
To raise plants for a garden.
Make a chocolate bowl with a balloon
What is the best way to add glaze to a lemon pound cake?
To hang a hammock between two trees.
can I make dessert quesadillas?
how do you get the toothfairy to come after you've lost a tooth?
Remove cigarette smoke from room.
To heat condensed milk, you can
How do I heat up the jar of queso ?
To prepare the canned beans for the salad,
clean shower head
how to store leftover tomato paste
how do you use the symbols on the keyboard?
How do you trim a steak?
How do you thread a needle?
Add extra space for bath towels.
how do you use only lte signal on a phone?
chisel
To let the water "breathe" in the aluminum wall aquarium.
how to make hash brown sandwiches
how to make a roasted carrots with goat cheese sandwich
How long to dry pieces of wood clamped together with wood glue?
How to create a foam to wash dishes with?
To make visiting the orthodontist more exciting for a child,
To keep track of your daily medication,
how to make cookie bowls for ice cream?
To allow more light into your home,
How can I scuff the surface of brass?
How can I organize fasteners and parts when putting things together?
How do you place moss inside the Marimo ball?
glass
Remove smoke smell from car.
To check the weather,
How can you escape an Alligator or Crocodile if it is biting you?
How to avoid metal from a pan dissolving in your food while cooking.
make lemon balsamic dressing
finger tips
How long should you cook a grilled cheese?
Prevent honey from sticking to measuring spoon.
How do I make sure the shoes stay attached to the babies feet?
if the batter for the nutella cookies is too liquidy
How to make colored candle.
how do you know when to charge something?
how to make cheesy chard mashed potatoes
How to throw a left hook
How can I help pasta boil better?
To prevent clothes from falling off of hangers.
To get a straight throw on a Frisbee,
To add decorative details to a wall.
How can I quickly clean my blender without washing?
To get blood stains out of clothing without any cold water or soaps,
how do you spread your legs?
How to fix a plastic key holder which is broken or split?
How do you declutter a laundry room?
board
hammer
lysol wipe
To make it so that chicken cooks faster, you can
In a table feet, how do  you protect your toes?
How can I give heavily soiled carpet a deep clean?
Keep taco standing when adding ingredients.
check barrels for any leaks
To remove latex paint stains from a shirt,
How do you prevent bones from ending up in your fish filet?
whiteboard
How do you make the sugar syrup that goes into bubble tea?
juicer
how to make almond nougat
To cut a piece of gum in half to share.
To obtain juice from an orange,
duct tape
how do you make a toast?
How to easily clean white sneakers?
make spicy chocolate chip bark
How to Make No Cook Blackberry Freezer Jam
To protect metal from rusting, you can
how to make a portable projector screen
To make a bamboo trellis frame
Quickly cool a can of soda to drink.
how do you make a smore?
how do you save a picture to your phone?
To use fresh cilantro to season salsa.
how to remove ink from fabric
wire
To make a hooked toothbrush for hanging in bathrooms.
logs
How do I cut the board at 45° using a handsaw and a miter box ?
How do you set goals for weight loss in a one month period?
Where to smoke meat?
How to make Dewberry tarts at home.
What is the best way to attach a magnet on to a wooden plank?
To keep keys easily distinguishable form each other.
Extract orange juice.
Save money on gas.
To prepare the jalapenos for the cheesy jalapeno bread
To determine what size to make a leather mystery braid cuff,
How to make washable hair dye for kids
brick
To prepare an onion for cooking, you can
dish
ax
how do you tighten your abs?
Improve short term memory.
What tools are needed for cabinet joinery?
To finish a wooden project and give it a satisfying sheen, you can
Prevent green fingers from wearing rings.
how to know when you dish is seasoned perfectly
refrigerator
sponge
Eating guacamole can make you happier
How do I make sure worms don't get injured on the mesh grate when making a worm bin?
To save leftover meat after cooking dinner,
keep bananas from sinking to the bottom of a cake
To make a Halloween cutout stand out in a window
How to make a homemade wasp trap?
Hearty meat
To assist women who cannot conceive a child by being a surrogate mother,
To combine small amounts of liquid, you can
what to do while waiting for cookies to bake
How to find the "sights" you want to see in places where people don't speak your language.
Remove stains from suede shoes.
To hollow out the core of an apple, you can
push pin
cook bacon in the oven
How to fix a belt hanger in the closet?
What can I do to repair the button on my Polo shirt?
To make easy monster feet for Where the Wild Things Are costume.
Remove painful band-aid.
tumbler
To reheat food without it becoming dried out in the microwave,
How can I make purple frosting?
Clear up a stuffy nose.
How to chop wood for a good fire.
how do you empty a plastic pool?
Keep food warm when bringing to Thanksgiving.
Fall asleep quickly.
How to tell if your pan is hot enough.
How do I remove sharpie or permanent marker from a wood table?
How do you open google chrome?
how do you 'clean up' an eyebrow you've filled in?
What supplies are needed to make a baby arms jewelry rack?
Add shine to kitchen sink.
To mask the vodka taste in vodka-infused gummy bears
To make a curved surface using a flat EVA foam sheet.
How can I make shoe covers at home?
To prepare soba noddles for cooking
How can you keep tidy when trimming nails?
brush
What is needed to make a hammer from a railroad spike?
To pit a cherry while keeping the stem of the cherry intact.
How to sand the edges of the wood.
Prevent note cards from liquid spills.
To substitute for heavy cream,
how do you scale a building?
how do you shut the screen off on an iphone?
Aphids aphids everywhere what can I do?
How to make ham pinwheels
To hold fabric in place while you're waiting to sew it, you can
How to check level with containers on wood plank.
Make warm apple spice crumble?
How do I make the hole keeper for the mold for a concrete necklace?
shoe
To keep the car neat and clean
To disinfect and clean a cat litter pan.
folder
how do i clean up my cuticles after painting my nails.
Make fried pork-chops
To get a stuck zipper to loosen up,
How do I prune my bonsai tree?
Remove crust from cooking pan.
To use paper to line the Japanese Garden Lantern lampshade that can be outdoors and let light through.
How to prepare carrots to make a baked cake with?
To save energy in order to help reduce climate change,
To remove a broken nail or screw from a wall.
Clean your sink drains.
How can I make balls out of play doh?
placemat
rubber
make an indention in a cookie
Deter mosquitoes from home.
how to apply nail polish smoothly
what is the best way to make your instructable illustrations look more realistic?
To make banana pudding
To take raw ginger to shreds, you can
How do I insert a CD into the computer?
How to prove your cinnamon buns?
What clothing should I wear to prevent mosquito bites?
To easily retrieve crumbs from in between keys on a keyboard,
How to make a bench?
how to make a caesar salad
where is the constellaiton Orion located
How do you marinate carne asada?
Break in a new baseball mit.
To make pizza dough easier to work with
To prepare metal for welding, you can
To squeeze a lemon efficiently
To cook out blood and impurities from beef, you can
how to use a spray bottle?
How to create a homemade potato shredder
To boil red potatoes
how would I make green paint
To ensure you stay hydrated throughout the day,
How can I get the bathroom floor clean?
how to make a roux
To help the cinnamon bread dough rise
Remove excess water from laundry.
To make a ball of aluminum foil flatter, you could
How can you make eggs bounce?
To find an egg substitute for baked goods that'll keep the moist.
To improve your mood when you suffer from PMS,
How do you get sunflowers to grow from seed?
How to drill a hole in a penny?
To keep a door from a cabinet from opening too wide.
how do you protect your skin from the sun when swimming?
how to get a gel eyeliner from a pencil
Keep clay earrings from touching the pan while baking.
To find an air leak on a car's tire,
How do you repair a torn shirt?
How do you decide what type of fish to keep in an aquarium?
To tie an overhand knot,
To secure a bracket to a wooden shelf, you can
Wrap yarn around bamboo skewer.
shovel
How do you clean a mop after it has been used?
How do I prepare the cookie sheets when making cherry cheesecake twists?
How do you make glass cleaner?
foil
To make a Jack Daniels BBQ sauce for chicken.
washcloth
To clean an oven.
How do I temper the hot cream when making a creme brulee?
To remove excess clay when sculpting, you can
To cast image of laptop using a projector
What methods can a robot use to pick up a part?
To cut a stalk of bamboo to a smaller size, you can
How can you make a pallet coaster?
sunglasses
how do you own a home?
To flavor plain yogurt,
To make your own wet wipes,
Sand a sled for future use
book
How can I wash my jeans?
How do you shape polystyrene thermoplastic?
how to make mulled hibiscus punch
How to make letters for the cardboard.
Vacuum in between keyboard keys.
towels
Draw more shoppers to your garage sale.
How do I give power to my LED bracelet ?
Fill the gas tank of an automobile.
Make oatmeal.
human
To separate egg white from egg yolk, you can
To quickly remove the steam from your bathroom mirror after a bath or shower.
Keep your cat off the table.
To become more knowledgeable about ancient history,
To make a juicy hamburger?
How do I calm my cat down
How to reserve a wedding venue
To create a refrigeator magnet from a small household item.
Improve posture of kids.
To give a foam star meant for a cosplay outfit some added dimension.
How to bread eggs.
How to snap a banana peel
make all natural caramel truffles
To open a can of evaporated milk,
How to cut a wooden gear?
How can I remove red wine stains?
ice cream scoop
How to quickly reheat pizza?
What ingredients do I need to make great cabbage at home?
How do you get grout lines in the bathroom clean?
Write a book.
To help combat climate change,
How to put butter on bread
Buy an embarrassing item at the store.
How do I know if my omelette is cooked?
How do you carve a niddy noddy?
To clean marker off of a bedroom wall,
axe
to remove a bee stinger from your foot
Deter bugs from home.
One wants a protein selection from the grill.
To attach a clasp to secure the leather bracelet made from a recycled belt.
Make a garden lantern.
How do I cook pasta, such as spaghetti or linguini?
Break toffee into pieces
how do you polish something?
How can you make a circular saw guide?
How to easily clean a wooden chopping board?
How can I protect trees and bushes from being damaged by weed whackers?
Add new keys to a ring easily.
How to ensure wood does not damage with age?
How to clean tserling silver.
To toast frozen waffles until they're crispy without a toaster,
DIY lotion bars with cocoa butters and waxes using molds after melting
how to make a diy grill brush
What is a good food base for a mario bento box?
How to mount stencil to credit card.
To stop meat from burning in a campfire
To make a no sew shirt out of an old shirt.
sleeve
To prevent your curtains from becoming wrinkled when washing,
How can I smooth the rough edges of my dogs nails after clipping?
how do you slide something?
How can i open the nail polish when it's stuck due to dried on polish?
To paint an interesting texture on the wall.
To protect your eyes when working with a lathe, you can
How do I make sure that chocolate nutella tart is easy to cut before serving?
How to remove rust from a bracelet?
To allow the Minnesota cookies to cool completely
Use alternative to bread for peanut butter.
To make dough for a muffin
How do you uncover a straw?
To clear snot out of your nose,
masking tape
speakers
Keep paint tray clean.
trowel
how to make thread smoother for threading a needle
Disinfect smart phone.
Make disposable oil funnel.
sleeves
How does someone stop the bleeding on a wound
To boil butter, you can
What should you put on when using a wood-lathe?
To see a shopping list without using hands when grocery shopping,
How do you make bouncy balls?
how to make fancy liquid soap
how do you smoke hemp?
cement
To make your own sauce for waffles,
shoes
To decrease the chance of MDF warping when using it as a base for a router.
Remove chewing gum from cloth.
how do you loop something?
how to get the most juice out of a lime
place the bin at the right height on the fridge
Make an egg shaped rice ball.
fork
To make sure that your stomach is not loud in public,
cheaply clean out your coffee maker
To make small holes in a piece of leather, you can
How do I ensure the mold is sealed when making a concrete countertop?
To protect dough while rolling it, you can
To clear up car headlights at home,
Extract more juice from oranges.
fire
Wash your car.
How do you brown the bacon?
Make a pool body board.
make hoppin john rice
How much food coloring do you put in the lava lamp?
How To Make No Cook Blackberry Freezer Jam
how do you sign something?
Upgrade front porch wooden column.
To start a fire in a fire place.
How can you cut a pizza without making a mess?
tweezers
To evenly and cleanly cut fabric and ensure no ragged, frayed ends
To apply duct tape to a sock, you can
What is the first step in building a boat?
To rename a file on a computer,
To avoid cutting yourself when opening plastic packages with thick packaging,
How to bake your jello cake?
how to get fine pepper out of a peppermill
How do I clean my Nikes?
telescope
How can I make a denser bread?
Add shine to leather shoes.
To make beans cook faster.
To fix a hole in a screen.
TO harvest a lettuce plant,
how do you use a yield sign while driving?
What do you do after using a steam cleaner?
How to prime a wooden object before painting?
broom
plate
How do you ensure that breadcrumbs will stick to mozzarella sticks?
To remove the rough coating of scrap wood, you can
To make a ham sandwich,
handkerchief
How to smash and peel a garlic close
sandwich bag
how to make hot tea toddy
How can you secure a wobbly shower head?
How do you attach zipies to a lampshade to make a ziptie lampshade?
To protect children from sticking things in a power outlet,
Cheating 
Reducing sodium in your diet
To get all the stuffed animal up and out of the way,
how to flavor pasta
how do you shuffle cards?
To detect the potential difference between two points
how do you extinguish a fire?
cook frozen soup
To remove permanent marker from the body,
keys
Use clear polish to help thread a neelde
How to lightly pickle onions?
how do you empty a soda can?
make herbed coconut rice
to clean horizontal blinds.
To keep public toilets from auto flushing on you.
How can I remove moisture from a phone?
strainer
How do I do lunges?
To make a notch in the center of a coin, you can
how do you unlike a picture on instagram?
shirt sleeve
preparing the cookies
To make instant ramen noodles without a bowl,
How can I cut my flowers?
Freshen breath without chemicals.
Prevent soaked bed sheets during the summer.
twig
How to attach the track pieces of a toy train set?
To attach paper labels to a glass bottle, you can
To clean a raw potato's skin of dirt and debris.
duct tape
how do you get pen off a wall?
how do you trample something?
helicopter
How to make Wild Mountain Dewberry cobbler at home.
how do you top an ice cream sundae?
how do you clean grapes?
use pomade
Can you pop your thumb out of place?
To prepare a pan for baking, you can
how do you do jumping jacks?
Prepare the concrete to pour into a form.
To create a wooden bench table that hangs on a wall,
What is the quickest way to assemble a jigsaw puzzle?
How to Make an Easy Adirondack Deck Chair
How to cut through thin wood?
To quickly peel garlic,
What should you do to a steak before marinating it?
How do you drizzle caramel from a bottle?
Where can a miniature BBQ grill be used?
Keep zipper closed.
How can I deal with my child when picking an option?
To tell if pellets coated in oil have detonated inside air gun.
Butter too hard to spread?
To put a bedspread on correctly
How can I protect my dogs feet from the ice and snow?
To cut the wooden board into circular rings to be glued together to me made into a container.
To mark a line on a piece of metal, you can
Prevent acne on face.
How to cut and drill an L bracket?
To open a soda can.
how to rejuvinate your cabinets
How can I draw a picture on glass so that it doesn't wash off easily?
To dice apples,
How to pierce your ears.
To shuffle a deck of cards easily,
To disassemble a computer,
How to properly brush your teeth.
When would you need to use a survival kit?
To cut pieces out of felt, you can
To dry a laptop left in the rain.
How to upload a video to Facebook
To make potato stock
Create Nutella filled chocolate chip cookies
Keep long lasting bathroom air freshener.
To get soil and roots to release gently from germination bed.
hair clip
how do I make a mug cake?
how do you wipe yourself after using the restroom?
How can I get rid of water marks on a table?
What is the best direction to park my car in Winter?
how to tell if a seashell is alive or dead
How spread butter on bread.
how do you steam an egg?
To get a more uniformed cookie cup cookie
How can you safely cut holes in clothing?
A large truck
How to draw a vertical divide.
To chop chives
Make a fresh smelling fire starter.
how do you crop a picture?
How to straighten your hair.
what to do with crystalized honey
how do I make super easy cheesecakes out of vanilla cupcakes?
screws
pins
Make a homemade sword.
Whip whole cream into shipped cream.
To find a small item quickly.
What are the first key on the majority of keyboards in North America?
baking soda
trowel
To cut a hex nut in half,
how to match flavors
garlic press
how do you rinse your mouth?
how do you get a drivers license?
How to turn on wifi on an android phone
how to make sweet potato tacos
How can I help chapped lips?
To make a center line in the dollar bill for origami.
To dispense icing onto cupcakes, you can
To keep your dog's coat healthy,
how to remove matte lipstick
How to do a DIY Sparkly Mirror Upgrade
Return to old spot on a web page.
shoes
To prevent the nasty clumpy black chocolate burn when melting the chocolate for the pizza cookies
How to turn whiskey into irish cream?
How to make glass cleaner solution.
To vacuum under the couch,
How do you stay warm at night?
How do you keep the heat from a fire inside a primitive shelter?
What are some ways honey bees help agriculture?
To make the chocolate pasta dough  pliable enough to roll
Glue two objects tightly together.
how do you pucker up?
To determine whether a wooden workbench is completely even, you can
To punch a hole in the piece of metal you are forging,
to make a custom concrete base for a lamp.
How do you scare little kids with a model coffin?
how do you manually turn off the screen on an amazon fire tablet?
To mix my ingredients together to make soap, what should I use?
How can I keep an oar that I am tracing from moving around?
make sweet potato baby food
To drink Sports drinks without gaining weight,
quickly slice strawberries
To make dough snails
Paper sacks
make candles last longer
how to clean keurig
To make a sponge cake,
How to keep nylon rope ends from unraveling.
To remove the top from a PVC barrel, you can
How do you keep quesadillas warm and crispy?
How to make fresh California Native Blackberry Syrup at home.
how do you shart?
How to build a PC at home.
shot glass
To secure wood chunks around an ABS
How to quickly dry glue?
how do you rotate something?
how to make homemade breadcrumbs
What should I do to concentrate while I'm studying?
How to prevent a phone from overheating in the car?
To remove moss from rocks,
How do you organize your alcohol cabinet?
keep pants straight
To prevent the nutella cookies from sticking to the baking sheet
To reuse some old modelling clay that has dried out,
how do you keep water inside of a shower?
How to turn on a laptop.
how do you use tape?
How to make sure bacon is cooked to be crispy?
What supplies do you need to make an eco-friendly holiday tree?
How do you shuck oysters?
To affix fabric to a wooden frame to make a piece of furniture, you can
How to sew a hole in a shirt.
how to preheat an oven
Apply blush
paper
hunting knife
What supplies are needed to make a Moai statue mold?
Are you nervous about giving a speech or doing something?  How can you calm yourself?
blade
knives
medicine cabinet
To make bread that matches Indian food well,
How to remove gum from a piece of clothing?
How do you get a wire through a lure?
How to unlock zip tie.
To make yourself look better on camera.
To crush beans, you can
Make a small buttons and pins holder.
how do you slouch when sitting?
Fix blurry smartphone camera lens.
What is the first step to take when starting to solder a copper pipe for a plumbing project
how to keep dough from sticking to a spoon
How can I cover the doorknob hole on an old door?
Re-lubricating a bike chain
Prevent stickshift from burning hands.
To add the look of green grass to the dirt block
How can I stay cool on a hot day without AC?
Make marks on a paper with a pencil
how to find the area of a pentagon
how do you look at past years memories on an app?
What should be used to mark where the final cut needs to be for the inside portion of a Torus box?
shampoo
how to set up a workspace
To affix a sheet of glass to the lid of a rubber tote, you can
To help prevent snow from accumulating on your driveway,
How can I make ice last longer in an ice chest?
What color LED should I use for a 16v mark on a battery test gauge.
how do you use a high chair?
How to remove hairs from a carpet.
What can I do if I am bored and riding on a plane?
sofa
how do you stop bleeding?
Remedy for plants turning brown and dying.
How to easily remove egg shells
What is a good way to save money and eat healthier?
Create filler material for gifts.
How can I make a scratched keyboard easier to read?
crossing out
To grease a pan before using it to bake, you can
How do I know if my baked pears are done baking?
how do you bust a lip?
How can I get rid of fishy smells in kitchen?
to clean up vomit
How do I make a cappuccino?
How to make a grilled cheese without a pan?
How to Heal Damage from Acid Reflux
how to make whipped cream
What dish is best to cook vegetarian chili in?
How do I keep apple slices from browning?
how do you plaster something?
When frying chicken, you can
Prevent trash bag from sticking to bin.
To make a wooden nesting box that will last a long time
To cut wood boards to custom dimensions, you can
When should I fill up my gas tank
How can I keep things fresh and dry in my closet?
To make pizza without grains of any kind,
To contain more ketchup within paper fast food condiment containers,
To create a small hole in a paper booklet, you can
To mold a pendant out of clay
make lemon basil tea in a jar
How can you improvise a water sprayer for your hose at home?
Make an Avocado Mask for Curly Hair
how do you replace a DVD in your ps3?
love seat
In order to cut yarn,
To sand a small wooden item.
how do you pay something off?
How can I protect the floor while bathing a dog?
how do you make lemonade?
Microwaves
nail file
Create night time garden reflectors.
Have chapped lips?
how do you save battery life on your phone?
how do you solve a seek and find puzzle?
Need to sand off a rough patch on my porch, made of wood.
crayon
How to keep from going hungry on a diet
Time for beating butter until it gets fluffy?
How do I hang a picture frame?
how do you do a makeup test?
How can I get the labels off of prescription bottles?
How do I make smores
Prepare the helmet for the glue.
how to make black tea punch
To stay warm in your room at night without any blankets,
How do I know if the price at Costco is their lowest, or is it going to be cheaper later?
how to prep a new smoker
how do you use a restraining order on someone?
To open the clips inside a 3 ring binder,
To find a use for those pumpkins after Halloween is over.
To make a cheap Star Wars themed Halloween costume.
To raise baby chicks in a cold climate,
How to add soil to a garden bed.
What's a good non corn thickener for soups?
plate
How do I keep a door propped open?
How to feed the iguana.
Studying for a test
pliers
How to raise the audio volume on windows 10
How to rub flour and butter
open a bottle of soda without it exploding
Make a Coconut Oil Mask for Dry Hair
Bake the pumpkin in oven at 350 degrees.
how to peel tomatoes
To prepare dates for homemade Larabars.
To get egg shell out of batter.
To start a fire without kindling
How to reheat pizza in oven
Prevent tall boots from falling over.
To dye the frosting for the lego brownies
how do you make a flauta?
steam asparagus
To get toilet rolls being used as seed starters to stand up straight.
To prevent termites from moving from firewood to your home,
How do you trim yams?
To show school spirit without a lot of money,
couch
make cucumber sandwich filling
phone
To bake a pie, you can
basket
To fill the gemstone made of a soda bottle so that it isn't hollow.
what to use for grating garlic
How do you keep your place in a book without folding the pages?
how to remove a splinter
How to dye your jewelry?
Make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
To make folding Kaleidocycle Folded Paper Toy easier.
crayon
To add a sour flavor to candy, you can
How to make Tuna Salad at home.
How can I make my closets tension rod more permanent?
how do you close something?
Clean your potatoes so you can eat the skins.
How do I clean the butt of my gun?
What is the best way to put home brewed beer in a barrel?
Why does sugar cause tooth decay?
How to mute a video on Youtube
How to make Kiwi/Gooseberry cobbler
To help your child feel safer in the water,
How can you dye fabric in the washing machine?
shot glass
How to Prepare Plastic Water Bottle to Make Pen Holder
What supplies are needed to make a string lamp shade?
how do you hammer a nail?
What are some ways we can use toothpaste?
How would one get their vegetarian waste to decompose in an environmentally-friendly way.
To use something other than cat litter for a litter box.
To prepare a pumpkin for baking.
Add labels to electric cords.
To remove old, chipping paint off of a wooden structure,
How can I get a stain out of a lampshade?
Preserve fish for use at a later date.
Make a wooden crutch.
telescope
How can I humidify a room?
To sign up to amazonmTurk
Keep silver jewelry clean.
Avoid lightning during storm when outside.
Learn to identify birds by their song.
to prevent water from leaking onto the floor from a leaky roof
How do you dissolve Skittles in vodka?
How to make coffee in electric coffee maker.
To prepare dry ingredients for muffins in order to get the muffins fluffy.
Prevent torn boxes when moving heavy items.
To attach smaller elements safely to child's busy board.
How to Route and Sand Easy Workshop Cabinets
How do I put a pone case on
How can I make my sneakers high visibility for running at night?
What are the finishing touches when making a small hand thrown pottery bowl.
how do you top mashed potatoes?
light
How to make a beaded friendship bracelet.
To roll a cylinder out of a piece of paper, you can
Make toast.
Make the doors for the castle the same size
How to make Red Eye gravy at home.
how do you put a seatbelt on?
Use a washing machine.
makeshift kickstand
To absorb shock with the Bicycle Camera Mount.
How to Cool Burns from Chili Peppers?
How do I seal joints in the vapor barrier when adding a sunroom addition to a house?
how do you get rid of a tick?
Apply face makeup to a latex mask
weights
how do you play beer pong?
Make an endless white board for kids.
To keep a dog from jumping on you too much,
To prevent your trash cans from stinking,
how to be comfortable cooking in a hot kitchen
To wash carrots, you can
how to keep a turkey moist
how do you mix chocolate syrup and milk?
How can I tie my shoes temporarily if I don't have shoelaces?
One seeks to make a folded flower pin.
How to drill holes into your bike gear?
How do you apply stain to wood?
To melt glycerin block so you can pour it into soap molds.
Make beautiful flowers from coffee filters.
How to keep earrings organized.
How to walk properly.
To make a paper holder,
chopsticks
To open a nut.`
To add decals to the toy boxes.
what to add to water when boiling veggies to boost flavor?
To turn a piece of bread into bread crumbs
How to build the base for your storage rack?
How can you recycle egg cartons at home?
Boil water in ground.
How to peel a tomato using water.
To poke a hole in the side of an aluminum can, you can
How to hide a valuable or expensive item?
how do you breastfeed a baby?
post-it note
Keep forearms warm.
How do I get an Uber
Remove oil stains from your driveway
how do you clip your nails?
cheese
How to cook rice perfectly every time?
What can I do if my coffee maker breaks and I badly need coffee?
Reduce dizzy feeling.
If a mixture of dough is too dry, you can
how to make pistachio slush
To mix in the shortening into the dry ingredient mixture for the flour tortillas
How to apply fake eyelashes.
To water your garden quickly and efficiently
Make a cheap hot tub.
How to turn off autoplay on Youtube
How can I clip a cat's nails?
how do you bake ribs?
how to remove odors in a car
To see why LED won't turn on in Tiny 9V Clip Flashlight.
brick
How can I cool a drink quickly?
to boost energy in the afternoons.
how do you have word vomit?
To cook the clay flowerpot bread
how to put air in car tires
how to find perimeter of a rectangle
Give your cat a bath.
To get rid of fruit flies
Where can I buy a wireless keyboard
Hot can I protect floors from furniture legs?
How do you make fabric softener crystals?
Disinfect your dish sponges.
In order to make cheap tentacles for a costume,
Store manicure supplies.
How can you break up concrete with tools in your garage?
Avoid mildew in luggage.
One wants to make beautiful designs.
To trim a magazine to form flower shapes.
To trim away excess fondant used in Flower Pot Cupcakes.
how to make pasta with garlic and walnuts
To appear like a lumber jack when in costume,
To dry herbs,
How to clean a pod coffee maker?
To brown butter.
To score a spare in bowling,
how to find Lyra
blanket
To make an iron man helmet with the face plate that opens up.
To proof yeast to make bread, you can
Which color to use which making a train costume?
Make dumplings.
How to make a place mat.
how to make spicy coppa toast
How do I melt old candles to make them into a jar candle?
Create a pickling mixture for any type of vegetable or fruit.
How to make Play doh at home
How does one power a robotic claw attached to the arms?
what to do with pickle juice
sleeve
How do you record your screen?
Get your car unstuck in snow.
To clean a motherboard.
how do you walk down the aisle if you're the ring bearer?
To blow up a balloon,
How to start a conversation at a party where you don't know anyone?
Make a book holder for children's books.
how to keep your pizza hot on the drive home.
Make a projector screen for movies.
make pet bed
how do you take your pants off
Disassembling old power supply.
To increase protein naturally.
Remove face paint without water.
What flowers do you use when you want to dry and press flowers?
How to make a resealable lid for cans?
How do you vacuum detritus off the surface of the sandbed in an aquarium?
To cut the ceiling for a club house made out of cardboard.
nail clipper
To make instant dried pancake mix
To properly boil white rice for eating,
How do you remove melted wax, like crayons, from your upholstery?
How to turn off a smartphone
How can you stop coughing at night when you are trying to sleep?
Is there an easy way to remove mud from the bottom of your shoes?
To fold a large nail over another nail.
Sharpen a pencil on a rough concrete surface..
Paint your cabinets.
how do you stand up?
How do you cook a potato in the microwave?
To make a peanut butter sandwich, but make it different than just PB&J or PB and Honey,
To make spaghetti.
Create Bacon Onion Tomato Bread
To melt chocolate for fondue.
To become better at math without internet or school,
To tell when an omelette is done
Prevent fraying of stuffed animals when washing.
To allow wood to adjust after being planed and jointed,
To dissolve sugar in water, you can
How can I prevent splinters when handling wood for wood crafting?
How to warm a room without any internal heating?
To turn off a frozen computer.
Boil eggs
Transport cannabis clones.
How do I know when whipped cream is whipped enough?
cutting board
how do you delete friends on find my friends?
To prevent the ballon from sticking to the chocolate
Where can I get my watch fixed
To prevent different cables from being tangled together,
What is the best time to eat dinner
How to sew a hoop skirt easily on your own?
How to Make No Cook Blackberry Freezer Jam
How can I soothe a bug bite?
how do you close a cabinet?
Preparation for the wood flooring.
How can I wrap and store extension and power cords?
How do you prepare scallops in the shell for cooking?
Preparing a dish to pour caramel in.
how do you stretch money?
Add shine to wood dining table.
What is the best way to hang curtains?
What time do you go to school
Prevent buildup of grime on tiles.
To create less waste,
Make an extra long funnel.
clean jewelry at home
How to clean out ice from a freezer?
how do you control something?
To remove residue from a label without wearing off the finish
whats the right way to butter bread?
What do I need for ice cream float
To peel a boiled egg by rolling,
To make extra space in your closet.
Stop a nose bleed.
Prevent onion skin mess in kitchen.
toaster
how do you check for a flat tire?
push pin
how to keep hamburgers from crumbling during cooking
whisk
how do you open a notification from the notification menu on an iphone?
To gain weight,
How to cut metal pipe.
To increase your PS4 hard drive.
how do you bargain with someone?
To keep your lawn watered without having to stand outside and do it yourself,
To make small circular pieces of duct tape for later use.
To prepare lemons for lemonade.
how to create storage for lids
how to grow potatoes
To create holes in planks of wood for screws to fit in, you can
spoon
How to grease sheet for BBQ.
To improve your vision,
how to make your home smell great
how to roast asparagus
How to make butter in a jar?
earring back
Increase lifespan of laptop battery.
How do I clean out my drawers of a dresser?
How do you cut off dead orchid stems?
How to make a shelter.
How to trace knife.
Stop apples from going brown
roach 
How can I get water to boil faster?
To prevent clumpy gravy when making it homemade,
how to strip a wire
How can I apply a wood putty in a small area without harming the surface?
how to clean up a stripped motorcycle seat base
Learn how to do a classic pullup.
How do you stick to a diet?
how to find the Auriga constellation
How to put air in tires
hair pick
Remove hard water stains from faucet.
To bake chips without using a deep fryer,
Making a portable stove
To send an email in Microsoft outlook,
How do you make ginger simple syrup?
how do you rest your eyes?
is there a way to save very dry shredded coconut?
How do I remove hair from a vacuum cleaner's beater brush?
microscope
Make broken plate art.
how to make fennel mashed potatoes
Where is the best place to bathe a guinea pig?
To frost a freshly baked cake
What type of blanket needs to be used to make a cage hammock?
how do you sing along to a song?
Plump up lips.
Where can you get an old transformer for your welder?
How to access taskbar settings on Windows 10
To fix dents left in carpet from furniture.
Force tears from eyes.
To make instant coffee
how to make peanut butter chocolate bites
remove a twist off beer bottle cap
Making moving homes easier.
metal spatula
Keep children busy during plane flight.
cranes
how to freeze chipotle peppers in adobo sauce
how to ripen a mango
bathroom cabinet
To remove moisture from sand, you can
Prepare a light bulb to be painted
keyboard
To make an instant cake mixture.
Folders
To minimize environmental damage when eating out at a restaurant,
Make leg warmers.
To clear a grease clogged sink,
how do you dismantle a table?
how to make smoked turkey with plums sandwich
What are some ways that I can hang things from my walls?
How to store tools to prevent damage?
ziplock bag
how to make anti-aging moisturizer
two large spoons
How can I bake an extra moist loaf of bread?
how to make amatriciana with clams
video
Where can I buy a cat
To make an ice pack that doesn't drip all over everything
To get groceries without going to the store.
How can I fix a frozen lock?
how to fill a cupcake
To easily remember how a lights wiring went before dismantling it,
How do I brown the butter ?
To was clothes without a washer.
To make nutella runny and easier to work with, you can
To water proof the wooden product.
Prevent drips and other food items from burning the bottom of the oven.
If your refrigerator seems to be running more frequently, what should you check first?
When painting a room - how can you set aside a small amount of paint for touch ups?
how do you start a subway order?
hands
How does a Faraday (shake) type flashlight work?
How to clean a coffee maker.
To create cold air in a DIY air conditioner made from a fan enclosed in a Styrofoam box.
What is an easy way to keep a room dark during the day?
How to Cut Vegetables to Make Salad Roses
how to stir a drink without a stirring spoon
how do you ride on a motorcycle?
To choose between two girls who are pursuing you,
What can you put on french toast?
To detail your car seats yourself.
Add fresh scent to microwave.
How to remove paint of skin.
Make the windows shine
To help relieve aching feet,
To attach pieces of PVC pipe together, you can
nail
How can I get melted wax out of a wax warmer?
How can you rapidly calculate a 20 percent tip?
To get homemade quantum dots to glow,
Unshrink a T-shirt.
How to make a grocery list for the fridge?
How can I secure a wooden japanese bridge to the ground?
How to know when a homemade smoothie is done in the blender.
soldering iron
How to make suntea easily?
easily clean out your coffee maker
hot pad
How to Make Easy Lemon Peel Juice
How can I baste without a basting brush?
tweezers
contact lens
How to raise chickens.
Take off a stuck jar lid.
How do I make popcorn
cook salmon in puffed pastry
How do you add some character to your jean?
How can I get my stove top really clean?
how do you play a dvd on an xbox?
set a mouse trap
How can I keep my tupperware and other light items from flipping over in the dishwasher?
clean caked on food in the oven
To become better at Scrabble.
Avoid mildew growth on bath tiles.
stone
How to dress up a tired room.
To get dressed.
To separate butter into cubes, you can
Fix crease at tip of shoe.
Push kid on swing at a distance.
How to eat a peach
How to make sweet bagel chips
How to turn on a television?
Remove the flesh and fur from a dead animal head for display with minimal effort.
To nail a board to another, you can
To remove indents in your carpet left by furniture like tables and chairs.
To feel less sick on a hot day,
To attach the shelves to the back of the cabinet
To make the best meat lasagna,
What if you have small space but still want to celebrate Christmas?
How do you get a dog to stop pulling the leash?
Prevent pot soot.
To easily keep business card contacts without filling your wallet to the brim,
How to poach an egg.
to protect the eyes from sand in windy weather on a sand dune
how do you send a post to someone on instagram
cotton ball
Store excess grocery bags.
To make pancakes easier to flip on a griddle.
Sanitize dog bed.
To roast a biscuit over a campfire,
How can I keep my different keys from getting lost?
replace worn roof shingle
To make a cheesecake batter.
rubber bands
how can I use olive oil for my hair?
To make a recycled wrapping paper wreath
rolled up paper
newspaper
television tray
how do you pray for someone?
Remove fuzzy balls from sweater.
To cook food wrapped in foil in a microwave,
chainsaw
To give control over how bright a light is.
How to clean the air vents on a laptop.
how do you bottle up emotions?
To get a free dessert at a restaurant,
How to easily clean up the kitchen after cooking?
Put a hole in a beer bottle cap.
crossing out
How to machine wash your pillow.
How to mark the specific line you are on when you stop reading a book?
What is the use of a Mod Podge?
How to make iced tea
How do you get rid of termites?
Pick up litter without bending over all day to do it.
How can I keep my power cord from tripping me up?
sleeve
What should you do after you're done riding your bicycle?
When rendering duck fat, what is the best way to cook it?
Avoid getting sleepy when waking up.
How do I hold my cake pops to dry/cool?
How do you store unused clothes effectively?
wire
Enhance dyes of dark clothing.
To keep your phone playing YouTube videos when closed,
How to serve turkey that has gone cold?
To remove wallpaper
To create an easy heating pad for your period,
how do you put a lip ring in?
How do I get the wood I am working on to be smoother?
How to Cut out the Letter M On your Monster Energy Drink Can Light
What should you do before you begin filling a sinkhole?
Make a themed flower bouquet to thank someone.
how do you go to the air force?
To make a wooden guitar pick.
how to make french toast
nuclear reactor
How do you throw a spiral with a football?
Heal mosquito bite.
To remove pilling on sweaters.
How to make Dark  Reeses Cup Tart at home.
To secure the sides of a wooden box together without using a hammer, you can
how to avoid glue squeeze out on miter joints
How to create a door for a cabinet?
How to trace a design onto a black t-shirt.
how do you check a tire?
How do I neatly cut slices of a chocolate nutella tart?
To look for items efficiently.
What are the ingredients to make Kansas City Brisket?
How can I get the mushrooms to grow better in my yard?
How can make sure my fire alarm is working?
to collect rain to water my garden
Easy instant oatmeal for lactose intolerance.
how do you time something?
To properly sort your laundry before you wash it,
how to make a pastrami with slaw sandwich
how to use rubber bands to clamp miter joints
blade
To prevent unwanted pregnancies when having sex,
what goes into homemade curry soup?
thicken a milkshke
To get the grime from under your fingernails.
How do I make soup
baby powder
how to make a buttermilk substitute
To place a key on a keychain.
To make a 10 degree angle cut on piece of plywood,
How to make a simple key chain?
Make a classy wine bottle holder for your next party.
Make a snowman.
How to sterilize baby bottles.
How to bake chicken
How to make purse handles.
How to make someone like you?
Identify your keys
Remove grease from meat loaf.
stove
To hammer a nail,
how to make homemade meatballs
paper
How do you remove lenses from glasses?
how do you create an heriloom?
When making a bait with rotten chiken livers and limburger cheese, what can you attract.
microwave bowl
What is the most common thing to eat for breakfast
Fix stinky bad breath.
How to keep a sandwich fresh and crunchy?
What herbs are good for calming you down at night?
To store old Magic the Gathering cards.
rubber band
Extend battery life of smartphone.
How to Get Rid of Stress Balls on Your Neck
how do you make yourself throw up?
tv
Peel an orange.
how to make a roasted squash with pear sandwich
how to make a candle that bleeds another color when melting
In order to paint barn doors,
To keep track of the time easier,
Make alcohol infused candy.
How to craft a simple wooden ring?
To make sure a strip of tape is the right size to hold an equal amount in each of your hands at once, you can
how do you use a chair?
Stay safe during a storm.
How do you remove mango juice stain from white cotton fabric?
Reduce risk of dryer fire.
To see what kind of competition in your local area there is when applying for jobs,
paper clip
How to clean a fish tank.
Clean dried paint from paint brush
To stamp your patter on the butter cookie dough
How to properly house a whale?
Removing spray paint from concrete
knives
What tool would you use to punch holes in leather?
How to make a simple costume for a medium sized dog?
To unlock T.T. in Diddy Kong Racing.
How do you prepare rocks for painting?
How to make great Strawberry Rhubarb cobbler at home.
To attach a closure for putting the diaper part of dog costume on the dog.
How to fill a pillow so it is softer?
what to use to bake peppers in
Make travel jewelry box.
In order to attach the clothespins to the plywood for a glove holder
make chewy brownies
To prepare fabric before cutting pattern pieces out and sewing
How do I determine how high to knit a hat?
Support eyes with food.
To start a bonfire,
How To Make In-N-Out Double Double Cheeseburger Copycat
How can I keep my home cooler in summer?
how to make smooth scrambled eggs
To bake the polymer clay art,
To filet pieces off of a citrus rind, you can
hands
how to sharpen scissors
how to keep drafts from coming  in
how can I broil meat?
To mix together dry ingredients while baking.
To imprint a pattern into a sheet of metal.
To slice basil for bruschetta mix
Collect ingredients for Jello fruit salad.
Shave chocolate block into thin strips
Small flat driver
bed
how do you use shampoo?
To prepare potatoes for a recipe, you should
how do you dispense water out of a sink?
Take dust off ceiling fan blades.
To blow out candles.
To get on base in a baseball game,
To save space and avoid clutter,
To find a sweepstakes to enter
Cut your wood to the appropriate dimensions.
How can I line a wooden box for a DIY dog pool?
To save money on movie refreshments,
coin
To protect files from being lost,
What's a way to clean my bicycle after riding it?
To carve a pumpkin.
How do you fold a paper airplane?
sweat band
To get the most fruit off the mango,
To create a paper holding jig,
How can I make a cool bright lantern if I don't have a battery?
Hollywood
foil
To split egg whites from egg yolks
How can you tell someone is lying?
To polish dark leather shoes without shoe polish on hand.
opening a jar lid that is tight
How to make a Asian marinade for chicken wings to barbecue.
microwave
Make a quick and dirty lantern
Pick up eyeshadow dust.
How can I get a ketchup packet open?
What is a creative way I can make a shelf cheaply?
how to apply eyeliner?
can I make my own coconut butter?
To make buttermilk using regular milk.
How to grow grass from seeds
cup
roast cauliflower
How to design bookmark from paint sample.
how do you complete something?
To mix eggs, milk, and vanilla extract, you can
make cold brew coffee
To jump start a car
How to wear a helmet?
To win a race in nascar,
To draw a circle on a piece of paper, you can
How to maintain an organized living space
How to trouble shoot a wifi router?
how do you spread butter on toast?
tumbler
In order to save the page you were on in a book,
Turn and roll dough.
To deconstruct the links of chain in a necklace,
To make a Tempeh
How do I make strawberry infused vodka?
brush
To attach a Vodka bottle to LED light base.
To measure flour correctly.
What supplies are needed to make embroidery thread Easter eggs?
remove paint from brick
How can I repair an opening that is widening in wall paper?
How can I cut up bacon after cooking it?
How To Prepare Street Signs for Use as Workshop Cabinet Doors
To clean silver
How can I make money at home?
mesh netting
Increase volume of phone alarm.
make tea in a french press
How do you eat oysters?
Secure a bicycle to metal railing.
how to make matzo melts
To clean your blender the best way.
What are the ingredients for cake pops?
table top
How can I remove permanent marker stains from furniture?
How to paint keys.
How to open a can
magazine
how do you memorize something?
To get the tag residue off of  a new pair of sunglasses.
How do you roll a bowling ball?
get rid of gnats
What ingredients are needed for potato and cabbage fry?
What supplies are needed to make emulsion glass?
oil
To remove ticks safely,
strainer
what to use to clean your tub
microwave bowl
How do I look at photos of haircuts
How to braid your DIY belt?
Clean laptop touchpad.
Prevent baby walker wall damage.
How to make a mason jar toothbrush holder?
How can I keep a completed puzzle from coming apart?
To feed the sourdough starter,
How can you get the freshest bread?
How do you make Iced Coffee?
What type of greenhouse glass is recommended?
how do you light a wood stove?
How should you tighten knots when making a Paracord Cross?
how to make chocolate caramels
To conserve water,
How to clean the bath tub.
How To make a sweet vanilla Souffle
To report sexual abuse in a professional environment,
To make a chess board
logs
how do you clean your tongue?
Remove stems from strawberries
wrapping paper
Remove permanent marker spots from kitchen counter.
How can I apply varnish to a large wooden surface?
How to make Pineapple Candles at home.
hands
How can I make mini flower planters?
To use a food processor to prepare dough.
Add shine to stainless steel.
how do I prep cupcake pans
To clean ash out of a bong,
To prep your oats to cook up properly and in a decent amount of time for your breakfast
To make wavy lines in Photoshop
To inject mousse into an egg shell for Fake Egg Molecular Gastronomy Dessert
rock
How to make a chocolate Star Wars Death Star candy
cloth
How to make wild Black Berry tarts at home.
To get the bathroom counters dry after washing your face.
how do you put a cap on?
how do you make a plain burger?
Make a merry go round
Make custom knife rack.
Use a natural shoe deodorizer.
Protect fragile plates during move.
Prevent rust on kitchen tools.
Practicing a new skill
To make a dustpan when you don't have one readily available.
How to make orange Marmalade white Chocolate Fantasy fudge at home.
how to make chicken and waffles
Who is the husband of the queen
To pay a bill online
What supplies are needed to make photo frames from old CDs?
How do you harvest the leaves off of a Yucca plant?
To cut the lemon,
How to keep sand in sandbox cool during the summer.
To send a child home on an airplane without you,
how to make a sandcastle wall
What clothing is best for summer for women
How do I prepare laundry?
shoe
How do I know how much salt to add to the boiling water?
kitchen towel
Find real reviews before buying item.
How to make noodles.
To put icing on top of cake,
how to make home cooked food taste like restaurant food
how do you use syrup?
To get rid of fleas on dogs
how to clean stove burners
how do you get a spare of something?
What items do you need to make rag curls?
How do you step tea?
To separate egg whites and egg yolks.
how to make juice grooves on a wood board
How do you get the sugary texture for health sour patch grapes?
tack
How to clean a dishwasher.
To seal leather for furniture,
Make lemonade
how do you frost a cupcake?
How do I ready a guinea pig cage for it's new occupants?
dresser
To fight Ivan Drago in Rocky for sega master system.
Make outdoor pillow.
ice box
Remove soap scum from shower door.
Recycle a spray bottle for a new cleaner.
How do you attach toilet paper to a glass jar?
How to make tissue paper window decorations?
Neatly wrap up an extension cord.
Extend life of flowers in vase.
how do you put eyelashes on?
Find spices easily in the kitchen.
peeler
How to clean blinds without tearing them up
What material is a steel rocking chair made out of?
To get a video game console for a cheap price,
How do you properly prepare a steak.
To cream butter and sugar together, you can
How to best cut the meat to place on a grill?
What alcohol do you pour for a mojito?
How to start an automatic transmission car.
How to make sure all the clocks in the house are set accurately?
How do you make plain toast?
Make a bulletin board.
How do you make raw nuts have more flavor.
To prepare carrots before cooking with them, you can
plastic bag
To discourage house flies from living in your home,
How to make Caramel Chocolate chip Girl Scout Cookie Vanilla Ice cream at home.
To combine cake ingredients.
To prevent gunk buildup in cup holders of a car,
To quarter biscuits, you can
To make a bedroom temperature colder without a fan or air conditioner,
how to get fluffy cookies
How to brine a turkey before cooking?
To spare the plant while picking lettuce
To cook perfectly golden pancakes,
generate poetry by using random words.
To fill a bucket with sand
To set the J bolt into the concrete mix in the mold.
Eliminate odors in the laundry room.
How do I fill holes and tiny gaps in the concrete when making a concrete countertop?
a bucket
When I'm deep frying a turkey, how defrosted should it be?
How do you remove gum from being stuck in hair?
fire
How long should liquid nails dry?
To get the best deal at amusement parks,
One seeks to make a cord weave.
To make wires look like tree branches on a wire tree.
How do I remove wrinkles from a new leather jacket that has never been worn
Kill fruit flies easily.
To prevent splinters from cut wood,
Trim apple trees.
How to easily form a perfectly round snowball?
How do I get my coffee to taste less dark?
how do you use headphones?
After staining wood, you should
How to order room service
How to sneak past guards in Metal Gear NES?
What are the benefits of anti-allergen vacuum cleaners?
How do you make an oil and vinegar dressing?
Avoid germs from hotel bed.
To allow the oil for the turkey fryer to reach the correct cooking temp
how to clean a container that held melted wax
How to light a candle with a deep seated wick?
To shape duct tape into a perfect circle.
What can you do when someone presses all the buttons on the elevator then gets off and you are in a hurry?
What materials are needed to hand sew an article of clothing?
To make a hard shelled taco,
One wants to eat Vegetarian.
How do I find something I lost on the carpet?
To make small candles to float in water,
To clean your microwave without having to scrub it.
To bend a PVC conduit,
Make a camping shower head.
Make Halloween lanterns.
change a lightbulb in a ceiling fan
Which direction to properly install an air filter.
Protect a bare shiny piece of metal, like a hinge, from rusting.
making a picture Frame on Your Wrist
How do you bake a cheesecake properly?
Easy way to hang your shoes in your closet.
Get cheap pizza.
How do you harvest honey from a bee box?
What supplies are needed to make a  small decorative Christmas tree?
How to create Dorodango (Japanese mud-art).
How to sleep in proper posture?
To extend the shelf life of lettuce,
To dye the white fondant to make the fondant roses
To make seed starter pots
To prepare a loaf pan for Blueberry Lemon Financiers.
How can I raise and lower a picavet with a camera attached so it can be flown with a kite?
Increase ability to learn something new.
When building a survival fishing kit, what can you use to make fishing hooks?
How can I set my umbrella up on my deck more effectively?
To remove sharpie pen from a couch,
To remove folds and creases from a sewing pattern
how to get perfectly done grilled meat
how do you floss your teeth with a toothpick?
how to winterize windows
PET ANT
How can I get free gym memberships?
how do you use cream?
Make a picture for your fish tank.
To get a good look at the hidden space above a room.
To build a giant Jenga set
tissue
What is the best material to be used for the solar air heating box?
how to dry flowers
How can I give a home made dog bed shape?
To create a replica of Back to the Future's Sports Almanac.
how do you give your fingerprints at a police station?
To get bricks to stay together permanently when building a structure, you can
Add taco filling easily.
Learn how to use a candy thermometer.
To smooth mayo onto raw chicken, you can
how do you keep blood circulating in your legs?
Make temporary hair dye for kids.
how to keep bedding wrinkle free
To tear apart a cheeseburger, you can
crossing out
How to grow a plant.
Maximize full toothpaste.
To seal the end of a plastic tube,
How can I get more use out of my utility knife?
To attach magnets to a piece of wood, you can
ask for help reading it
To simmer water, you can
how to add a deeper flavor to ground beef?
To make the base for a 3D Mickey Mouse head.
When heating milk to make cheese
To prevent cupcakes from sticking to a pan, you can
How do I clean car upholstery
To get air bubbles out of cakes.
To prepare an empty 2 litter soda bottle to use as a plant pot.
How to attach a pendant to a necklace.
How do I make the pattern for the baby leather shoes?
how so I make apple pie chis pudding?
clothing
how do you smear liquid?
How to make Lemon Swirl Lemon curd fudge at home.
how do you hydrate after working out?
blankets
How can a person use images from the internet to create a Candy advent calendar?
To hold a bungee cord so it stays stretched out, you can
How to peel an onion?
How can I get the best Bell pepper?
To make a hood for a cloak.
To make the caffeine in coffee release slowly after consumption,
To obtain meximum deliciousness of the nutella cookies
To hit a volleyball
Remove pop bottle cap that is stuck on
How to keep cool outside.
How do you make gluten free brownies?
Make a yoga mat carrier.
how do you sign into your chime account?
How do I lower the foot on a sewing machine?
Melt mini marshmallows.
Who wants dirt tracked inside the tent?
napkin
How can I keep paint off my carpet when painting my baseboards?
how do you wear a sweatshirt?
toilet tissue
Shave using an organic shaving cream
How can I soothe my tongue if I burn it?
How do I prepare the dough for butter cookies?
how to make smoky pretzel mix
How do I put a game in an Xbox
how do you change your profile picture on facbook?
How do I melt beef fat?
How to grow a new grapevine using cuttings.
how do you find out what's wrong with a car?
Detect odd car noise.
How to Raise Threadfin Rainbowfish Fry
Install cabinet pulls.
To sprout seeds for your garden,
how to find the perimeter of a trapezoid
How to teach your toddler how to talk.
How to prevent BBQ chicken skin from burning on the grill?
Prevent earbuds from tangling.
mittens
how to cut sticky desserts
To cook the kebab meat on a grill
How do you prepare fresh chicken eggs?
aluminum foil
how do you strut?
Finish the concrete patio.
safety pin
How do I get glitter to stay on ribbon?
How can I paint stars on a black background?
To keep Boots and thick shoes dry and smelling fresh.
To open up google,
Save money on airplane flights.
how to remove really sticky tape
how do you distract someone?
One wishes to make a place for their plants.
how do you use an eraser?
To save cookie dough to use at a later date, you can
What is the best way to check if a baby's milk isn't too hot?
How to roll chocolate truffles.
How to sharpen scissors easily.
how to keep colors from fading in the wash
how to unzip a backpack?
To prevent burning overflowed cookie batter to your oven
table top
To create the force behind a DIY table top crushing press.
How to make the eyes of your diy Halloween mask?
Harvest maple syrup.
How to make the front of your DIY Viking Cardboard shield?
how do you return a package to sender?
To cure a hangover
What plants work best for upcycled kitchen planters?
Making mac and cheese.
How do I build a bike wall mount?
When doing sit-ups
spoons
dish towel
What do you need to make a knife rust-proof?
To make honey chipotle marinade for chicken
telescope
To delete a folder in a windows laptop.
How To Find a Stud in the Wall to Secure Workshop Cabinets
penny
Remove oil based paints from painting tools and brushes.
Turn any cup into a travel cup
To make a folder paper easier to mount to a wall, you can
Hold a cheap ring.
How can you  spread butter if it is cool or too hard to spread?
To use a readily available item as a pen to run electricity through for DIY metal etching.
How to cut out square on Styrofoam ice box.
Avoid frozen wiper blades.
To prevent a certain area of a piece of paper from being colored when applying dye, you can
Create a Mask Armature
What type of shirt is best used when ranger rolling a shirt?
To shoot a nail gun.
How can I stop Eye strain and help prevent headaches?
How to remove a temporary tattoo.
How to get water out of coconut.
how to hold a match for a fading flame
squinting
What can I use to go to London the quickest
table
How to get people to come to the carnival.
To store your briquettes
What supplies are needed to make a bird sculpture out of broken CDs?
How to remove water stains from shower glass?
how do you use a chip on a debit card?
To make dry shampoo
To add light to a project on a circuit board, you can
How do I prevent my muscles from getting sore after lifting weights or exercise?
How make design on leather ?
How to Make Easy Apple Roses
How to chill dough for ricotta tart.
To make steak tender.
how do you serenade someone?
How can I make a funnel?
how do you belt someone?
how to make bulgur with figs
What knife is best to cut a watermelon?
how do you gain arm muscle?
How can I sweat less?
To remove excess grease from the cooked bacon for the zombie burger
After baking the rollo cookies
What supplies are needed to make homemade butter?
How can I get the lumps out of gravy?
How do I prepare eggs for an easy omelet?
To keep jewelry organized when travelling.
To follow a link in a task.
peeler
To prevent the bottoms of your shoes from touching your clothes in a suitcase.
To learn French.
How to make sun catchers in christmas (or other holiday) shapes
how do I remove a chocolate milk stain?
How do I get a stain out of my curtains?
How to format a USB drive.
To make hay.
Best way to pierce ears.
how to get great cookies
Clean dirty cup coaster.
How to create scary halloween lights?
how to make asparagus omelet toast
How to make the caramel fudge?
how do you use ice cubes?
To dry stinging nettle leaves for future use.
mold
what is the best way to apply car wax?
Jig Saw
how do you use a zipper?
How would a person reattach a handle portion of a styrofoam foam board sword if it broke off?
machete
What is the best way to get rid of hiccups?
How to keep my child from knocking over my purse?
How to apply suntan lotion
To make ensure your apartment has good cellphone service,
fruit
bath tub
To open a milk container.
Prepare clay for a kiln
cut an onion without crying
To cut a precise chunk out of a wood plank, you can
how do you set the reward goal on mturk?
Establish a health history for new puppy.
To mince a carrot
How to underline text in OneNote
How do I make a PB&J?
How do you clean an aquarium filter?
camera
To sew the bike inner tube fabric using a sewing machine.
How do you blend out your eye shadow?
Mold and shape eyeglasses.
How to keep ice from melting in the freezer?
How to prevent a poached egg from losing its shape?
To make Belgian waffles
To heat set a length of ribbon, you can
How do I make a hanging lamp with Christmas lights?
toilet tissue
how to make Dry Buttermilk Pancake Mix
how do you dial on a home phone?
Add more fluff to whip cream.
Make a new sponge from an old plastic mesh bag.
Scrub tough grime off kitchen counter tops.
To repair a cracked cranberry cookie dough log while cutting
how do you put a stamp on a t-shirt?
How to add water to soda bottle.
How to make hot chocolate
How to teach a child to be responsible?
lipstick
How do you tell if a water bottle has been opened?
How to ensure all parts of the wall are insulated.
How to tie shoes.
How to make a rabbit cage physically cozy for the rabbits?
To protect yourself while deep frying a turkey
How to beautify a hanging basket.
To cook the leeks before adding rest of Skyrim tomato soup ingredients.
Make a glass vase.
To save plants from rot root.
How to reuse old kitchen jars?
To make cake mix used for cupcakes more dense.
plastic wrap
How do you make sugar cubes?
One seeks to shield themselves from the rain via easy DIY methods.
Avoid being under powered during trips.
To wash clothes in a washing machine.
To prevent the jars from breaking when they are filled and processed with homemade dog food
how do you save a contact in your phone?
How can I organize waste in my car?
How to create a shape out of duct tape?
To cut the bacon for the zombie burger
How to use an earth magnet to find a stud in the wall.
Cut out pages from a book
To get the clay flower pot bread flower pot out of the coals
To prevent birds from pooping on your car.
How to make tuna salad.
compactor
How can I fill dents and rough areas on the surface of a wooden table I am building?
A nice canvas
How can I neatly store my headphones?
How can you you ensure that wood planks do not split when drilling holes in them?
To cut radiant foils to be used to cover the attics.
To make the monkeys mouth on the monkey cupcake
How do I get fish for my aquarium?
To keep the sun out of your face while outside on a sunny day,
To glue the pieces together,
wire
how do you use dumbbell bars?
When following a recipe that calls for a baking pan, how do you know whether you should use a glass or metal pan?
How to easily leave a note in invisible ink?
how do you take soap off of clean dishes?
how do you customize a phone case?
To make a decorative pencil holder,
To roast an eggplant, you can
How do I clean the deck of my lawn mower?
How do you separate the yolk from the egg white?
How should I use a sumatriptan injector?
sofa
Treat a dry nose.
how do you cook a cookie?
To cut a length of PVC to size, you can
how do you turn on an iphone?
What supplies are needed to make flubber soap?
How to quickly cool down a bottled water drink?
paperweight
Increase chances of lost phone return.
Stop stones from slipping while gluing together
To grow herbs in homemade pot.
To keep sweat out of your eyes while exercising,
To absorb moisture in a closet, to preserve clothing,
To avoid dripping juices in the oven while roasting,
How to mail a letter.
To keep from making a mess when putting holes in drywall.
how do you dispense of something?
How to make the dough for your peppermint candy?
How should I drill the hole in the back of the frame?
hands
How can I make glow sticks last longer?
To prevent egg shells in your cookie dough,
When working on the electrical components inside a lamp, you should
What size fish tank should I buy for my Betta fish?
sofa
How do I start getting clean in the shower?
To easily disburse pancake mix on a pan,
Boil potatoes
To prevent a door from latching shut,
How to cut out your base?
Prevent bottles from rolling in fridge.
how do you sail a ship?
gun
To store old beer bottle tops to use for crafts later.
how do you check something in the stove without opening the door?
How to sharpen a pencil without a pencil sharpener?
How to clean a hairbrush.
how to add feet to a coaster.
how to find the surface area of a cube
What ingredient is left out of fluffy slime that is normally in regular slime?
Easy way to maintain a shopping list for groceries.
To create an orange pigment with paint you already have, you can
How do I keep the contents of a cooler cool without using ice?
How to prepare fishing line.
How do you make maracas?
hands
To make the binding for a book, you can
Deep clean coffee grinder.
To ensure your wood screws don't go all the way through the wood.
To protect a dish while it's in the fridge
a brush
shirt
Avoid wasting power in fridge.
To make a wine rack.
To attach 2 pieces of fabric together
How to Make Peach Puree
How can I get wood filler into a small crack?
old shirt
How to remove milk from car seat upholstery
To help clear out breathing ways when you're congested,
To separate egg whiles from the yolk using a water bottle.
how to make basic risotto
To prepare frappucino bottles to be repurposed as spice storage bottles.
hook
How do I preserve a 63-year-old bomber jacket that my father wore in WWII?
To turn heavy cream into whipping cream without equipment.
How do you grill fish without it falling apart?
How do you organize dirty clothes?
Removing small scratches in the finish of wooden furniture.
To quiet and noisy box fan.
spear
how to bulk up thin soup?
To mend hems quickly without sewing.
Make extra money using my house this year.
To cover the slide portion of a child's wooden slide
Supplement a possible bad gift.
To get a rebound in a basketball game,
to taser someone
Prevent rugs from moving.
How to heat a knife to cut thru plastic, rope and other hard materials
How can I sneeze when I feel like I want to sneeze but can't?
How to keep brown sugar from going hard?
How do you clean inside windows?
How do you replace fabric in something with a hole?
How to create a golf ball pendant?
how do you blame someone?
The best nail to use at every crossing of a roofing job
Freshen up breath.
Get enough rest before a trip.
To clean an engagement ring,
Hammers
desktop keyboard
Melt marshmallows and butter for Rice crispie treats
two forks
to make popcorn without a microwave.
To keep your entertainment center safe from children,
How to seal off small damage on a plastic surface?
soap
Use peroxide to lighten hair
How can I remove wrinkles from clothing?
To add a cinnamon swirl into your loaf of bread
how to clean road salt off of leather shoes
How to thicken barbecue sauce.
basket
To flatten a woven rug so it doesn't bunch up, you can
To keep berry and granola layers intact when making Granola Crunch Berry Yogurt Popsicle.
dresser
How to open an electronic gadget's case
To hang a picture frame up.
Cut the sleeves off the shirt
cotton ball
To fully cook the mac and cheese in the oven
To make seat belt metal cool on a hot day,
comb
my eggs are almost expired, do I have to toss them?
Make a candy cane ornament out of beads and a pipe cleaner
To attach wefts of synthetic hair to one another.
watering can
crisp, textured layers in crust
To mark lines in a piece of dough, you can
How to infuse coffee flavor into cream?
radio
To make an effective piece of origami,
To insert a G-Tube into a stoma,
How to stop a pie crust from burning while it bakes.
How to entice picky fish to eat food treated with medications?
To drive in a screw at an angle.
To serve the microwave brownies
Organize tiny office supplies.
how do you fry a corn tortilla?
folder
Fall asleep easily.
How do I open a water bottle if I can't do it with my hands
Cut a book cleanly in half.
What tool can I use to deburr a copper pipe when working on a plumbing soldering project?
how to make slow-cooker polenta
To make caramel popcorn.
To reduce the volume of the sounds that can be heard through a wall,
How to wear a wide brimmed hat?
How do you cut a circle ruffle?
How do I attach a screen to the top of a trash can?
To iron small spaces in between buttons on a shirt.
To create the perfect white russian.
To clean stainless steel pots,
how to allow more drainage in a pot for palnts when repotting
how do you calm down anxiety?
Sift flower for a recipe without a sifter
What flavoring do I need to make indian kheer?
Avoid getting burned by hot seat belt buckle.
To make a simple chili recipe, a cook would need to have,
how do you squat in an apartment?
how do you cheese something?
Prevent cake from sticking to pan.
How to prepare to patch a bicycle tube?
How do you dry herbs when making homemade herb oil?
How do I get the weeds to stop coming back in my garden?
how to make the color orange with paint?
Organize small item supplies.
To thicken syrup made with berries.
to attract blue banded bees to the homemade insect hotel
how to remove collar stains
How to make Cran Apple Tarts at home.
How do you dry out a wet honeybee?
how do you declaw a cat?
To engage in activism in order to combat climate change,
To treat superficial frostbite,
pen
crayon
How to download an app on an iphone
Put a layer of light heat protection between fabric and wood.
To make your way to the front of a concert audience,
blade
Keep cutting board in place.
Remove corn husk easily.
Ingredients for strawberry glaze sauce.
How to remove a stuck light bulb.
bowl
What can you do when your drapes in your hotel room won't stay closed?
To measure oats into a measuring cup without making a mess,
How to hide scratches on leather furniture.
how to make chocolate vanilla wafers
A convenient way to store trash bags.
How to cut wood on a band saw.
How to make shoes larger that are too tight now?
key
Write a message with candles.
How to make Chocolate Macadamia Ice cream at home without an Ice cream Freezer.
how do you carve a pumpkin?
open jar
What do I need to incubate chicken eggs?
make a back of earring
To make use out of coffee grounds,
toilet tissue
how to make sweet potato spoonbread
How can you avoid being affected by Poison Ivy?
Remove tiny pieces of shells from cracked egg.
How to cut dragonfly wings out of metal.
fried pickles
Prevent cold sore from spreading.
how to make carne asada tacos
how to open a lock illegally?
Remove sand from feet.
Treat muscle cramp.
how do you stand a bike up by itself?
machete
How to Meditate
How do you remove mortar from a brick to recycle it (the brick)?
How to keep herbs from wilting?
To cook down chopped apples mixture,
How do I clean plantain leaves before cooking?
how do you chew your food?
Make homemade pasta from dough
to keep from ruining the walls when painting
microscope
To know when your plaster mold is ready to break open
Remove smell from camping gear.
Are nasturtiums easy to grow and are they beneficial to my vegetable garden?
Speed up clothes ironing.
What can I drink wine out of if I don't have a wine glass?
how do you mark something?
how to wrap soap
D.I.Y nail art.
How can I cut pieces of wood down to the length that I need?
how do you use ketchup out of a ketchup bottle?
To use an Nintendo 64 rumble pak.
To increase the heat in a recipe using jalapenos, you can
Put wheels on the helicopter
How to grow a beard
Spend a night in a parking lot without getting kicked out.
How do I know if a bell pepper is full of seeds?
To brighten the flavor of a fish taco,
How to Transfer Words to Wood
To attach splines to a wooden frame, you can
Easy bookshelf.
How can you make your stale bagel edible?
Paint your nails with polish.
How to serve chicken for a family?
How to properly store kitchen knives?
To make as simple bread recipe,
how do you check your credit score?
tape
listen
How can I soak up spills on concrete?
How can I get a stain out of my new hooded sweatshirt?
how do you scavenge for something?
To see what a baby looks like before it is born,
What ingredients do I need to make raspberry bark>
Hardened ceilings
To repair a dented automobile bumper at home.
Make gourmet marshmallows.
Butcher Shop
How to cook meat on a fire pit without a grill?
machete
how to strike a match
clothing
Is there a product that helps keep dirt and grime from sticking to my car?
What can you use to sound dampen your room?
How to make a container for makeup brushes?
how to store summer fruit for winter
Remove musty smell from room.
How can I easily add decorative feathers to a dream catcher?
To make the monkeys ears on the monkey cupcake
To shape the Popsicle sticks into a sunflower shape.
To allow dough to become firm, you can
make a bowling game in the yard.
where is the constellaiton Octons located
To determine how much iodine needs to be added to test the water for drink-ability.
To clean the front grill of your refrigerator
To keep skunks from coming onto your property.
How to shower correctly
peeler
how to make southern ham-pickle salad sandwich
Catch a mouse in a trap.
What is one of the best aerobic exercizes?
How to make White Chocolate Mint-tini.
To use pliers properly.
How do you lodge a knife into a firewood log in order to split it with the knife?
To make a graham cracker crust, to turn graham crackers to crumbs, you can
How do you make jello shots?
how to let go of feelings?
what is a great  rub for chicken?
To get wrinkles out of shirts or slacks.
To increase resistance on a metal spool that has a spring inside, you can
Make antacid tablets into calcium carbonate in powder form.
To store food without a refrigerator,
How to store bread so it does not go off?
Create disposable door mats for rainy days.
bowl
How to make a garden in the city
What basic tools would be needed to work on electronics?
how to keep a cake from drying out over several days?
How to install hooks into a wall.
Prevent people from approaching you in public.
To attach two pieces of leather to each other, you can
How do you break down the leaves harvested from a Yucca plant in order to process it for fiber?
To list the materials to carve wood
To cut a milk carton to make it into a wallet.
How to finish wood table after pictures have been glued on.
Where can I find good music to listen to
How to keep a car interior clean and tidy?
How can I make my keys easy to tell apart?
How do I mix in the flour for butter cookies?
Is there a certain perfume or spray I can wear that smells nice and can keep away mosquitoes?
how to make deviled eggs
how do you open a wrapped present?
basket
How can you get the smallest size drink at Starbuck's?
Learn a new way to take an interesting selfie.
how do you write down time?
To make ice cream easier to scoop,
Make paper bird feeder.
How to make low fat Meringue baked clouds at home.
piece of nylon pantyhose
Remove hair from kitchen drain.
To keep plants watered while on vacation.
sticks
To charge a phone while out in public with only the charger,
fertilizer
Make air freshener.
How to wash your face?
Set up a magazine holder.
hands
how do you pick up toys?
rope
how do you open a wine bottle?
broom
How to make spooky fantasy Blood Orange Fudge for Halloween at home.
to keep your word?
how do you use a siri suggestion?
How to dislike a video on Youtube
Squeeze a lemon wedge into a drink.
To clean out your dishwasher,
To make a ball of aluminum foil,
repel flies
If you want to get money from an ATM or other cash cheaply with no fees what can you do?
Prevent drying paint.
use baby wipes for hemorrhoids
To prolong the life time of your flowers.
Keep cut spot on tape roll.
What kind of berries should I use in a Purple Goddess Salad Dressing?
Treat a large cold sore.
Remove seeds from  strawberries
Increase pressure of vacuum cleaner.
a knife
Add shine to microwave.
how do you make soup?
How to properly dry and clean a knife?
marker
How can I keep a bathroom mirror from fogging up?
how do you sit a baby in a restaurant?
How do you get rid of Hiccups?
What color should I paint a cardboard Iron Throne cat bed?
Moisturize skin without lotion.
to make it easier to push the reset button of the garbage disposable machine which is located underneath the machine
To more easily access popular rides at a theme park,
To make an iPod waterproof for use when swimming laps.
ice cream scoop
How to boil pasta
how to clean a microwave
How can I get more gas for my money?
trees
How to make mashed potatoes.
how do you use concealer?
ice pick
To make a BLT,
Make vase structure (shell)
Organize frozen food packages.
How do you prepare mashed yams to be cooked?
,A knife
To prevent headaches from eye strain.
Guard mixer from splashes.
adding scents to lotion bars
How do I apply concealer?
Decorate messy cords.
How can I keep mosquitoes away?
To bang a gavel.
how do you experiment with something?
To bend copper wire into a V-shape
Make house smell like a bakery.
To smooth a wooden rod so that you can drill into it, you can
tongs
How can I remove the green tops off a strawberry in one easy step?
To keep necklaces from getting tangled when traveling.
How do I prepare my parchment paper when making pavlova cookies at home?
Save money on groceries?
To get rid of a mouse infestation in a home,
To make a rubber mallet when you need one for a project.
How to finish the floor of the treehouse.
To prevent injuries when carving a stick with a knife,
How do you make beaded hair sticks?
how do I fix a squeaky window?
How to apply sunscreen to the face?
how to roast butternot squash
Remove sticky stain from coffee table.
To build a heated floor for a shack,
How to wash your windows without leaving streaks?
To harvest kale from the plant,
To remove the rust from a small garden tool,
marker
How long will it take to cure countertops when redoing a kitchen?
make pineapple drink
Prevent lightbulbs from sticking to fixtures.
How do you close off the balloon at the opening to make sure the beads do not fall out in a stress ball?
How do I put fiberglass on my board so it will be stiffer ?
How can I mark walls for hanging or placing something?
To grate butter for use in pastry without the butter melting.
How can I safely melt the ice on my windows?
How can you get a free pickle at Disney Land?
Make organic air freshener.
How to paint your go cart?
How to clean a chicken for cooking?
how do you flex?
How to serve chips directly from the bag?
to shake your head?
To replace the battries in this flashlght.
To clean a toilet bowl,
tub
How to remove the frame from an old pop up camper?
how do you put a collar on a dog?
Reduce amount of food in diet.
How to Cool Burning Skin from Chili Peppers?
Trick kids into taking powder medicine.
shot glass
To cut a rectangular strip out of cardboard, you can
How can I cut cake perfectly and NOT smudge the nice icing?
Make bean sprouts at home.
how do you cut a sandwhich in half?
To trick your teenager into cleaning their room,
Remove dust residue from chalk boards.
Prepared Potatoes for making Mashed Potatoes
To prepare a potato to roast in a campfire after you have washed it,
how do you use a draw/erase board?
To make a piece of wood darker in color,
sweat band
Attach tooth picks to a cork board to create a thread spool holder.
How to flip chicken in a pan
How to Prepare Colored Pencils to Make Easy Pen Holder
How do you get rid of acne scars?
To mount a TV on a wall.
Retain study notes in brain.
Make clothes drawer dividers.
how to make grapefruit taste sweeter
How do I arrange fresh flowers in a vase?
How to improve your jaw in boxing
To cut through a plastic strip, you can
To clean inner tubes, you can
To remove a screw from a board,
How to brush your teeth
Stop a key from sticking in a lock, or from being difficult to put into a lock.
How to make a wrist corsage.
how do you stop a stomach from growling?
How to change to a new Wifi connection on Windows 10
To chop parsley
How to make Fresh Peach Ice Cream at home.
Remove pantry smell.
To toast a hamburger bun, you can
Dumpster dive.
To make a ball of "yarn" out of fabric from an old piece of knit clothing.
How do you make your trash cans smell better?
Sift the flour, baking powder and salt.
How to attract hummingbirds to your garden?
To remove ink from a sheet of copper if you make a mistake when applying a stamp to it, you can
For making leather earrings, how much leather would I need?
To organize the untitled music on your phone,
mallet
To make the most of an exotic trip,
Make a quick tube dress for your daughter's barbie doll.
how to make a salami with spinach sandwich
How can I slice up a banana?
How to clean a toilet.
To create a template for a 3D papercraft project.
One wishes to be more artistic with their smoking.
cans
To peel the shell off of a hard boiled egg.
To use a splash of vanilla extract,
Brush dust off eyebrows.
How to drain a bath tub.
To decrease the amount of car pollution in the atmostphere,
how to make a watermelon shake
sleeves
To prepare plums for filling.
gun
To obtain water that is hot enough to clean jewelry, you can
To remove the seeds from a butternut squash
To temper chocolate.
To attach strips of cardboard to a larger piece of cardboard, you can
Dry out shoes quickly after rain.
To secure a bolt in place, you can
how to make smoked-trout salad
how do you give a confession
How to finish your braided cord bracelet?
What can you use for a fence for a DIY bird feeder?
Take pet hair off sofa.
To make a pretend knife for a cake, you can
how to easily collect produce scraps
How can I make a home amplifier cheaply for my I phone music?
how to render bacon fat?
To increase the flavor intensity in a pot of soup,
thimble
To secure the thread when using your sewing machine.
To attach the wooden boards the LED lights will be attached to the wall.
how do you buckle down on something?
To pour hot fudge over ice cream before serving,
To make extra money in your neighborhood,
how do you clean the pumpkin seeds?
To prevent dust from getting into resin design while it dries.
How to make Beef Tallow (with a Slow Cooker).
How do I get an airbrush painting onto the material surface?
To substitute for eggs in a banana bread recipe,
how do you save a message on snapchat?
To get carrots to grow in your garden.
To dry potatoes for frying,
Wire Racks
Prevent feet from sweating when wearing flats.
To start the bed bench project for your bed,
How do you ensure a potted succulent will drain well?
To make corn bread.
Remove caked dust from plastic window blinds.
How do we patch the concrete cracks?
wool
How to remove pesticides from fruit?
How can you legally get a free donut at Krispy Kreme?
Create your own templates for quilting.
a  shovel
To rinse out an egg hair mask,
Remove tick from skin.
To replace vitamins expelled by body through frequent urination caused by diuretic alcohol.
How do you build a moss wall in your planted aquarium?
To seal an envelope,
fist
To clean a thermos without putting it in the dishwasher.
What supplies are needed to make a vinyl record door curtain?
How can I keep all my small bit organized?
How can I get rid of the ant problem in my bedroom?
How to puncture a hole in the bottom of a soda can.
How to smooth edges of wooden leaves.
what materials do I need to paint an umbrella?
How can I charge my phone in a hotel room if I forgot my charger?
How do you make a snow ball?
How can I make playdough that my child can eat?
To tidy up the pancake making process
how do you put underwear on?
To store your seasonal items,
how do you check if you're pregnant?
Maek homemade chinese noodle soup in a jar
How to make Tropical Storm sauce at home.
How long do you let the dough rise for the bread?
Prevent soggy microwave pizza.
To place a screw in a plastic lid, you can
What is the best way to apply nail polish to a professional result?
How to clean urine inside a toilet?
What can I use to draw
blanch asparagus
How to ensure the rice for a horchata drink has a smoky flavor?
Use healthy sandwich alternative for mayo.
straw
To make a gnome's body filled with lavender flowers.
How to make spiced Orange tea.
quick cook fresh broccoli
Make food display shine.
Choose the right fish for your tank.
How can I keep my garbage disposal blades sharp and in good repair?
How to make Oh Henry Candy bar Ice cream at home.
Write a children's book
push pin
How to dye yarn.
How to make hole in tin can.
Increase chances of winning Rock, Paper, Scissors.
When working with foam that contains hazardous chemicals, to remove the chemicals, you could
How can I fix a nail polish smudge?
How can I pull/push my child in the swing while sitting down and resting?
Cranberry Honey Barbecue Sauce
floor
To increase the power of a vacuum,
how to make mixed grains with dates
How to hang a painting on the wall.
filters
Yarn-Wrapped Painted Jars
How do you reduce wear and tear on the nonstick finish of muffin pans?
To crack an egg without any special tools,
how to store fresh herbs
Cutting and Gluing the Cardboard
pliers
How to open a jar with a stuck lid?
How do you undo a clasp on a bracelet?
To quickly cook broccoli when making rice,
Is investing in the stock market a good choice?
how do you prepare flowers for a vase?
To attach the PVC pipe wire holder to the studs behind the dry wall.
how do you use parenthesis using a laptop keyboard?
how to make a black forest beer
How to string leaves together.
To cut a specific notch in a piece of wood, you can
When is the best time to go to a very popular theme park?
What surface can I use to properly iron a shirt?
One seeks to have a decorative portrait appear to move.
To perfectly fry potatoes to create french fries.
To make bath bombs.
make a clear broth
Picking out the right seeds to grow in the bottle.
How to make Vanilla Root beer Ice cream at home.
Discharge fire extinguisher
how do you get rid of bags under your eyes?
How do you remove the center seed pack?
how to shine cloudy glasses
To smooth the texture of plywood,
Do I need baking powder or baking soda to make pancakes?
To prevent a tile coaster from scratching table tops, you can
To get a stain out of clothes.
how to pit cherries without a pitter
How do you finish wood veneer in a natural color?
How can i make my own ranch seasoning?
How to ensure that the seesaw is well balanced?
how do you sample something?
To make your own pop up card,
What's a great way to find free wood that's usable for building?
To stuff Hawaiian Burger Bacon Balls with cheese.
How to make a simple camping lantern.
How to dye an egg.
To stir cookies into frosting, you can
Work for xlab
Organize the pantry
To solve a Rubik's cube,
How to make Hershey's Gold Vanilla Ice Cream at home.
how do you take pills?
To cut the rolled out poptart pie dough
How to place the mounting pole for your hose reel?
glasses
Plastic wrap
Draw a circle.
To indicate where to cut on a wooden block, you can
Remove a brand sticker from a two liter plastic  pop bottle
To make holes in the sides of a plastic soda bottle.
What else should I add to a peanut butter sandwich?
How do you say "I love you" in Swedish?
how do you trip on something?
How to make a dust pan
To allow a pie to cool, you can
To heal paper cuts and stop the pain immediately.
how do you crumple a paper?
To create a bight with congruent ends for the Lanyard Knot.
How to replace your exhaust manifold.
rag
Bend a piece of thin steel in half to make a loop
how to sanitize a toothbrush
To make a wallet out of cartoon paper.
Make emergency car cup holder.
How do I get the window of my van clean?
how to keep earbuds from tangling?
mouth
stand
Clean sharpie permanent marker from a tile wall.
clean bottles for storing water
To make sure the chicken is fried evenly
How do you melt crayons in silicone molds?
Bathe a large dog.
How to sand the wood block.
To prepare the cream for baking,
A spit
how to make cheesy spinach salad
How to bend a metal coat hanger
how to master the quick pickle
How to make your jeans into a shirt?
Make SOS signal.
To wash your hands,
To make whipped cream ahead of time without it getting runny in the fridge.
what to use in a dirty martini, in place of olive brine?
How to attach a torn off lace into a handbag?
To pit whole olives,
How do you get a waterstone of fine grit to produce slurry?
how to easily remove the pith and peel of an orange
roller
How do you prepare paint to repaint a house?
To regulate a fan speed.
How can I keep a piece of paper from sliding around on a table?
mallet
How can I get debris off of my couch?
How can I tell if my apples are genetically grown (or altered)
What tools do you need to make a suncatcher?
hat
How to make a pencil holder with toilet paper rolls.
What do you need to shape the macarons?
Make pickled eggs.
Make a toy for baby.
How do you kick a soccer ball?
how do you marinade meat?
How can you hold drawers together while the glue dries?
how do you cure a dry face?
How much salt should be added to a brine for smoking food?
To dig a hole to begin a garden, you can
how do you spike a ball?
How can I get the marker stain out of my t shirt?
chip clip
How long do you need to wait until the glue gun heats up?
heater
Once you have put melted HDPE plastic in a mold what should you do next?
Create a wonderful Fried Chicken dish from scratch.
How do you sharpen a knife?
How can I keep a basement from smelling like mildew?
how do you suck on something?
To hold metal still while you're cutting it, you can
how do you check if chicken is cooked?
how to remove a tick
How can you decorate an old shirt to give it new life?
how do you fill up a bag?
floss
Make a mini hiking kit.
how do you walk?
How to start a fire in a fireplace at home?
To allow yourself to make edits, while writing by hand.
To easily thread rope through a bag to act as a drawstring.
Concrete
How to get to sleep quickly
how do you terminate something?
How do I attached a rubber foot to wood?
Organize restaurant delivery menus.
To use tights that have been ruined by a run,
how do I peel garlic without a kinfe
how do you prepare for surgery?
Dye lace with koolaid.
how to increase shelf life of nuts?
How to make Special Dark chocolate Bar Chocolate Ice cream at home.
To make housebreaking your puppy easier,
how do I locate Circinus constellation
To fit the crust to the pie.
pitcher
To attach a set of LEDs together so that they are functional, you can
how do you stomp something
To cook the carrots for the shepards pie
How do you build arm muscles?
To additional sweet flavor to homemade condensed milk
earring back
To draw a design on a lawn mower blade to prepare to turn it into a spearhead.
To help screw in the nuts and bolts.
how to make middle eastern egg salad toast
water
How to make Vanilla Confetti Fantasy fudge at home.
To remove price tags stickers off of an item.
What is the best way to cut narrow metal bars to size?
knives
blankets
To get good clean windows,
How to make homemade mac n cheese?
To shake hands with someone
How high should you hang sound dampeners in a recording room?
sofa
water
can you use any oil for frying foods?
Create a frosting piping bag.
How can I clean the grate of a bird cage?
To store spices at home using recycled materials, you can use
How to know when to buy and sell stocks?
To restart a wall mounted heater unit,
How to cut PVC pipe?
Absorb car spills without napkins.
Remove hair from hair brush.
ice pick
How can I make my trash can smell better?
sunbathing
television
How to change your car's fans.
Reduce chances of vomiting.
To smooth the edge of the bar stool seat.
To get a rest when you're swimming in open water,
how to open a paint can
rolling pin
To have at least a small influence in politics in any country.
How to delete email from android phone.
To remove wrinkles from clothes
How to make a payment with a card chip
How would you sew together the separate panels of fabric to make a doctor who 4th doctor look-alike scarf?
How can I add walnuts to a chocolate chip cookie recipe?
To make a phone call from a land line phone,
tack
aluminum foil
Why do some people get tongue tied?
how do you make pots and pans easier to clean?
To melt the chocolate for the pot brownies
To clean steel before sealing,
How do you make sliced bananas?
What can I put in the bottom of a flower bed to hold moisture in?
How to search in Yahoo
To affix wooden doors to a frame without using nails or screws, you can
Mango Float in a Jar
how to identify poison oak
To make a framed chalkboard, what should I do with the plywood after I've cut it to fit in the frame?
To make a cake look like it was frosted by a professional.
How much rhubarb do I need for making rhubarb strawberry pie?
To feel more comfortable when out in public,
How can I make a bed for a small dog?
How can you keep your taco shell crispy when building your tacos?
how do you put on false lashes?
To use herbs for flavoring when infusing water.
What is a good inner-garment for a lady to wear with a strapless dress?
candy dish
To combine flour and baking powder together, you can
How to install a carseat into the car.
mirror
How hot should my green house be for optimum plant health and growth?
Make a mini terrarium.
remove paint from skin
How do I pack dirty laundry in a suitcase for the way home?
To delint your couch pillows.
an axe
screwdriver
Help food digestion after eating.
baby powder
How to brush your dog?
Reheat rice
Roughen up the smooth surface of a hanger
to repel bugs
How do you pour metal safely into molds?
To make a wire stem of a beaded flower
To mix other oil paints to create orange,
Make cauliflower cheese casserole
How to untangle extension cords.
sky writer airplane
how to make a creole cocktail
How can I make a unique jewelry holder?
To make an ice pack that won't drip when it melts.
To prepare carrots for kimchi,
how do you meaasure something?
To remove lint balls from fabric
wash veggies
How can you use a brick if you have extras when you're done?
To make homemade mustard creamier.
Making nutella cheesecake
How do I dry boiled potatoes?
Keep your teeth white.
To conserve electricity,
What type of saw is needed to make a hardwood headphones stand?
to clean shoelaces
How to make a basic sled?
fist
Remove hair from bathroom drain.
how do you stack boxes?
Make your own area rug.
How to prepare a cast iron skillet if stains won't come free?
how to make coconut-almond truffles
To assemble furniture,
How to whip up a batch of body butter.
To create a wick holder for lantern made out of tin can.
How to add the change pockets to your card wallet?
how to make fava bean-mint toast
What  do you use to propery smooth cement before it dries?
Baby proof a shopping cart.
What ingredients are needed to make English Breakfast Muffins?
What supplies are needed to make a bath mat from cork?
To reduce the pain of a sore through with a natural substance,
How to best carve out a wooden clamp for picture frames?
To decorate a cup just like a fancy starbucks drink.
how do you use the and symbol on a laptop keyboard?
chopsticks
How to Make Dipping Sauce for Onion Rings
how to melt beeswax
What do you need to make homemade "Blackhead Pore Strips"?
How to prevent a padlock from freezing.
skateboard
How do I prep my eye glasses if I wanted to paint the frames a different color?
How to fix a water damaged book.
Cool down body temperature.
How can you improve the chance you will remember something?
To swipe a card.
To create squares from a plank of wood, you can
What 4 items do you need to make slime at home?
colander
To cover a print with masking tape before spray painting it.
How do I make the lollypop handles round?
To lose weight while still eating a lot of food every day,
how do you toast something?
How to boil barbecue sauce.
Add traction to outside floors.
how to cut acidic marinara sauce
fingernail
how do you hop?
To reduce the amount of bubbles in concrete, you can
How do you cut a baked polymer clay stick in order to make clay sprinkles?
What do you use to make a DIY lotion bar smell good?
What can I make fake eyeballs out of for my scarecrow?
how to choose a watermelon
To cook lemon curd, you can
How can I make sure a pitcher of lemonade doesn't get watered down?
How to pry pallet apart.
What is an easy object to use for the eyes of a squid costume?
What is the best way to feel at least a bit happier every day?
cave
How do you make glow water?
How to make garlic bread.
tissues
two wooden mixing spoons
To remotely control your computer.
How can I draw a circle on paper?
How to bookmark a website on Chrome
container
To keep your pizza crust from getting chewy when you microwave it
How can you neatly cut a cake?
What can you do to the mold if you want to remove gummies easily later?
How to make Fennel Fig tarts at home.
How to make sure your pet is healthy?
To joint the edges of a metal frame, you can
How can I blow up my air mattress with a shop vac?
How to flat a tortilla without a tortilla press?
To catch people who break into your car,
How to fix a saw on to a table?
To perform an update on your phone.
Deodorize an item.
Boil water for a cup of tea using a stove.
How to ignite a gas stove with a tricky igniter?
One wants to watch free public broadcasts.
How to remove garlic odor from hands?
make a grilled cheese
How do you find the area of a triangle?
Deadhead flowers
binder clip
Restore dull wicker furniture.
Remove algae from garden paths.
To use greenhouse space effectively.
How do you ship live aquatic snails in the mail?
To make a bong out of a soda bottle,
how do you share your location on the facebook app?
to depress someone?
To keep edges of strapping from continuing to fray inconspicuously.
how do you flush something?
How to quickly dry a towel?
To become more mindful during activities,
strainer
how do you use the depo birth control shot?
To make a refreshing apple iced tea,
Make DIY lash growth oil
How to start a small flame without wood or a candle?
blanket
How do I slice a vanilla bean when making ice cream?
Prevent baby from dropping sippy cup.
How do I choose good apples at the grocery store?
To make sugar syrup, you can
To scramble eggs once cooking in a pan,
smoke
When making blueberry muffins or cupcakes, how do I keep the blueberries from turning the muffin or cupcake blue?
How do I garnish kheer after it has cooked?
how to make a pureed based tea
To tell when cabbage is done cooking, you should
shampoo
serrated knife
How to clean sneaker soles
Learn to quilt by hand.
Make a piano fountain.
how do you test if pasta is fully cooked.?
How do we make the paper earrings dome shaped?
To ensure you put the caps on the keyboard back in the right places after dissembling them.
how do you do something quickly?
Tie a string knot very tight
To clean a knitted blanket.
how do you recline?
How can I drain excess oil from fried foods?
How to chill trifle dessert
mop
How to make the potion have a pink glare to it?
how do you stir liquid?
How do you write with a pencil?
Increase smoothness of hair.
How can I make a cool hanging shelf?
To decorate a lemon cake naturally,
How can I lose more weight?
To pry a nail out of a board,
How to paint a wall
how do you go home on the instagram app?
Mixing the ingredients
How do you talk into a mic without causing distortion.
To attach a comic panel to a piece of wood
sharpen a crayon without something sharp
how do you prepare someone?
hot pad
How to attach a necklace when you've lost your clasp?
Keep Sliced Fruit From Browning
Create a filtering net.
Make the best tasting lemonade you've ever tried.
how do you tip someone at a bar?
make a Caribbean coco drink
Is it better to use large scissors or small scissors?
To keep homemade apple juice from turning brown.
How do you steep tea?
To make the spinach ricotta filling.
how to slice meat easier
Make earring holder.
How to make macaroni and cheese.
how to make cream cheese-veggie toast
how do you play scrabble?
Make oatmeal.
To attach rope to latex, you can
To raise the boiling point of water, you can
ziplock bag
How do you tie-die fabric?
how do you prepay a pizza delivery order?
Is there a best way to blow up party balloons?
Avoid static in clothes without dryer sheets.
how do you poke around in a building?
mold
How do I prepare my dry ingredients when making garlic naan?
Increase acid content of plants.
Buy name brand clothing inexpensively.
how do I make butterscothcies
straw
How to put a Windows 10 PC to sleep
how to start a blog
How to make Sound Waves on a Speaker: Goo Dance Party
How do I tweet something
Clean candle wax.
Attract deer and rabbits to your back yard.
To make an alcohol watermelon.
To knock out a stone fireplace for a renovation
How to Build a Generic Air Cannon.
How can I keep beads for projects organized?
Protect dishes from chipping.
To easily prep garlic.
How to swing a swinging ball?
How to tell when chicken is cooked?
To make a chalkboard out of wooden pallet planks.
When making a bottle cap dragon how are the caps fastened?
Mark hunting trails.
How can you bind PVC pipe together?
Make flat iron holder.
To bend shapes in wire
How do you spread cold, hard butter without ripping your toast to shreds?
Sanitize second hand toys.
How to thicken a soup quickly?
how do you shield someone?
To prevent the bread bone dough from sticking to the cooking pan
Make stick arms for Frozen Olaf Cake Topper.
Knowing how much water to add to a homemade self watering system.
How can you prevent early waking when you have been drinking alcohol late?
How can I avoid cracking wood when adding screws?
Hold hair pins near tub.
To make Langos more Vegan friendly.
To preserve pancakes for a week.
toilet
How can you save money when buying chicken nuggets at McDonalds?
How to make fried ice cream
Mix a screwdriver drink
Get a babysitting job.
under arm
how to easily cut bacon and pancetta.
How to make an overhead stand for pictures?
Remove an ant colony.
forks
How can I sand dry wall without making a mess?
Prevent balloon from popping easily.
To protect a workstation when working with paint, you can
To dust your ceiling fan
How to eat a grapefruit.
What are some items I would need to store fresh greens?
What ingredients are needed to make French Toast Bites?
How should I start the assembling process?
make zoodles
Add seed identifiers to new plants.
chip clip
How can I quickly and easily remove strawberry stems?
Paint rocks for hiding
How to make a Wild Blackberry cobbler at home.
What is the best thing to brush onto your skillet to season it?
How to make rice crispy treats.
How can you preserve your shower curtain and stop it from molding?
How do you clean a sponge?
how do you use the touch bar on a macbook?
Avoid corrosion on metal light fixture.
What is a dish one could make for someone with a Gluten allergy?
How to get a ring unstuck from your finger?
baskets
how do you close a backpack?
How do I bake the puff pastry when making strawberry napoleons?
To prevent children from locking themselves in a children's bathroom,
how to grill boneless chicken?
how do you cover the lens of a nikon b500 when it's off?
How to remove stains from a leather wallet?
how do you ask a question on paper?
How do I decorate a green paper Christmas tree cone?
how to thread a needle
Pick up broken glass.
How to sweep a porch
how do you butter toast?
pot and lid
How do you store root vegetables?
What supplies are needed to make a 'The Neverending Story' book box?
How can I clean the outside glass of a fish tank?
To deodorize a diaper pail using household products.
Save money on gas.
how to find the lateral surface area of a triangle
Keep the ducks off the beach.
To keep fruits and vegetables fresher, longer in the fridge.
toothpaste
To freshen up an old sponge,
pan
how do you hang something?
Add ventilation to a room.
liquid
How do I turn on a desktop computer?
How to safely change a light bulb.
how do you win a debate?
chalk
how to make spiced rum balls
To prepare the hotdog base for the hotdog burger
How do I make glow-in-the-dark planters?
How to Get Smooth Legs
What ingredients are needed to make decorative lotion bar?
How do you make a lip scrub?
To help prevent tangles in dog fur
Keep paint from drying.
Make a healthy veggie side dish.
How to clean dentures.
how do you open a diaper?
Make a glass piggy bank.
To help calm down a sore throat with a natural solution,
to do a thorough job?
how to remove coffee stains from fabric
How do I create a white sauce for goat cheese pasta?
How do I know what to do if a service dog comes up to me without their owner?
To plant a seed.
See designs of all t-shirt designs at once.
To reshape a steel buckle.
How to make an Oil and Ice Density Experiment
How to easily fish from a pier?
how do you walk a dog?
To prevent a child from falling into a window well,
how do you throw something away?
Clean eggs from your chickens.
Protect garden from ice frost.
To make a flakey pie crust.
Keep laptop from overheating.
icing
reed mat
How can I melt beeswax?
bobby pin
how do you inflate a tire?
How to fuse the end of your bracelet?
how to keep plastic wrap from folding on itself
Prevent cold chills in rooms.
To make stuffed pizza crust
To tell when liquid is about to boil, you can
When making a window greenhouse, what can I use to seal the gaps between the plastic bin and the window frame?
To prevent dough from sticking to your hands while you knead it
To cut a shape out of wood, you can
How to make a small but cheap home easily?
chip clip
Get rid of flies indoors.
How do you use banana peels on your face?
How to dissolve iron
How to dry tomato seeds without them sticking together?
How can I clean off my bedroom door it I don't have cleaner?
To continue using your phone while eon an airplane,
Make desktop resting spot for cat.
Remove odor from microwave
How to make tiny cake pops.
To melt chocolate, you can
how do you stream a movie?
One wants to make a musical instrument out of a bottle cap.
To make a double boiler
To clean off the blinds in your home.
slow cooker
How can I marinate venison steaks?
To remove seeds from cubed watermelon, you can
To prevent killing the yeast when adding the butter to the spanish bread
To remove a wine bottle cork screw without a corkscrew,
Seal a sucking chest wound.
how make a fire ring
When allowing chicken to marinate, you can
How can I get shiny hair?
how do you clean a kcup machine?
How do I take the best group selfie on your phone.
how do you show you're married, with jewelry?
To decorate the top of the cheesecake you made in an interesting fashion?
How to make a vodka and soda?
crayon
foot
To give a screw a firm fitting in a wall.
laser
To get a pinch of salt,
How can I remove a nail from wood?
To finish your typing project without running to the store when you are typing and your white out bottle empties,
how do you spoon someone?
how to clarify butter
How can I get something sweet even when I am not eating sugar?
Remove pieces of egg shell from batter.
Make a fluffy ball from the fabric and fluff
To repair a torn fingernail,
How  do you make pants into shorts?
how do you power through something?
q-tip
If your muffins look to be getting overcooked you should
How can I check and see if cupcakes are done?
To stretch tight shoes.
How do you add olive oil to a small saucepan?
How can I make money, at home, easily?
How can you reuse old lip balm containers?
To assemble cardboard together to make a shelf, you can
How can I clean a playpen, if I dont have a bathtub?
How to fix a tire on to a car?
how to tell if my steak is done, without cutting into it?
cheese cloth
To make sure ingredients don't spray out of the blender.
To play youtube videos on your phone,
To improve engine efficiency,
Prevent spiders from entering house.
Carry multiple luggage.
washcloth
How to make Skor Bar Ice Cream at home.
To extend the lifespan of a wooden project, you can
Place a hole in a water bottle lid to make a squirt gun
To join pieces of plastic straws together for curved, polygonal art.
how do you crisp something
How do I cut the dough when making garlic naan?
I think I have too much mint growing in my garden, should I get rid of it all?
To attach a peg board to a frame, you can
stainless steel bucket
To make a day seem easier,
to cool down a cast iron pan after baking
whisk
Create paper microwave cover.
How to keep flour from going everywhere when using a mixer.
Brown sausages.
Will rising prices correct a recession?
how do you scan an ar code in a store?
Prevent lipstick on teeth.
Identify a one way mirror.
To substitute for potatoes in a dish, you can
how do you dispose of razors?
Bring a mat for outdoor concerts.
how to make pancake cones
How do I fuse glass for an art pendant?
To make a cheap terrarium for gecko.
Clean soap scum off bathroom tiles.
To coat veggies with flour and seasoning, you can
how to properly season a dish
How to Tell if an Avocado is Bad
blanket
To keep taco fillings from spilling out.
How can I make paper look older?
hose
How do I cut a cake horizontally?
easiest way to pick up shards of broken glass
make chedddar beer rice
How d I keep the Chicken Cordon Bleu rolled up?
what pan to use for frying eggs
how do you switch profiles on instagram?
Upholster a piece of padded wooden furniture.
how to make corn succotash
wood
fingers
Break the goal down into smaller pieces.
To load cylinder containers to a truck.
How to read a comic book
How long should the caulk dry when sealing a concrete countertop mold?
Clean kitchen tiles.
toilet tissue
how do you deal with nausea?
How do I cool the  cheese roll ?
Make your own Raisins.
how to give pastry's a glossy appearance
How to take your bust measurement to help find your bra size.
floss
how to keep pressed flowers with color
Remove stench from baseball cap.
How to prep bread.
Improve running form.
how do you go to your facebook profile from the home page?
how do you get a dog to fetch?
How do you harvest chicken eggs?
To learn how to ride a bike.
Save time at baggae claim.
how to make more room in a closet
To remove a zipper from a leather bag, you can
To check your breath in a short amount of time,
basket
How can I clean my toenails of debris?
Prevent water waste in toilet.
How to Make a Banana and Oatmeal Facial Peel
to make a portable bidet for a bed ridden person inexpensively
To become frightened of a movie again after seeing it before,
To open up bolts.
What is a good alternative to sandpaper when removing varnish from wood?
how do you exchange an item?
Cure a headache with a drink.
Protect wooden surface from moisture.
How long do I bake the semolina-coconut mixture when making a basbousa?
How can I keep buttons from falling off my clothes?
clamp
How should I open jump rings when making earrings?
How can I clean my tennis shoes?
how to make pasta
handkerchief
how do you call the fuzz
Make Peach Lemonade
What materials would be needed to make a fall wreath?
What if you have the nagging feeling you haven't installed your new car seat right?
To sharpen the end of a nail, you can
To add fragrance to glycerin for making soap.
How do you snuff a candle?
To save money on storage bags,
How to make lemon Cooler cookie Ice cream at home.
To rub spices onto pork
How can I get rid of dark circles under my eyes?
To remove permanent marker from clothes
Prevent slammed doors from injuring kids' fingers.
Dry small clothes without a dryer machine.
how do you 'spread peace?
to cut the fabric for the patchwork rug fast
napkin
To thicken a mixture
To make a good Thank giving food basket for low income people,
Sharpen a pencil with a knife.
shears
phone
how to clean a cast iron skillet
Pay the mortgage payment.
When making a modern planter box, what type of wood should I get?
To smoke tobacco with a coke can,
How do I organize a neighborhood cleanup
how to make nut brittle
To anneal a metal file, you can
how do you edit an order at a drive thru?
What materials are needed to make a dancing waterfall decoration?
What should I keep in my glove compartment?
How to fill up mason jar with water.
How to Prepare Bottles To Make a Liquid Hourglass
How can I clean out a fish bowl?
how do you stack something?
how do you omitt the truth?
How to clean a mirror
How to add an additional compartment to your backpack?
how do you use the flash on a nikon b500?
How to cook cookie dough.
How do I make scrambled eggs with spinach?
Microphone
How do you leach acorns via cold process?
To clean a hairbrush.
Make a small animal trap.
how to identify a square
sharpen a pencil
how do you use a diving board?
how do you type in lowercase letters on a macbook pro?
soap
How to Figure Out the Area of a Parallelogram
how to blow a bubble
How to make Orange Nut fudge at home.
How to clean your computer keyboard keys?
How to disembowel a giant teddy bear.
Choosing Better Food for Healthy diet
protractor
To cut circles out of dough without a cookie cutter.
drone
To safely sleep with your baby in your bed,
Where should I plant lily bulbs for the best results?
How to Keep the Breading from Falling Off Chicken
To carefully cut a slot into a piece of wood, you can
Shovel
To remove an avocado from the shell
How to make a poncho hood tent?
fridge
What can I get to make sure I can make a fire if going on a rafting trip?
How to make a normal glass of whiskey cold?
A good way to cut a wooden panel in half.
How to clean grime on a stove top?
How do you boil sweet potatoes?
What is the main purpose of a minimalist wallet?
Prevent rust ring from metal shaving cream can.
toast sliced almonds
How can I get hand prints off of my car windows?
Sharpie dried out?
Learn to write poetry.
How to increase the heat in a coal fire?
When can I see the moon
When making rhubarb strawberry pie, what options can I add?
To add a sweet taste to the chicken I just made.,
How to make Perfect California Wild Blackberry Ice cream at home.
bat
To inspect your mattress for damage
To keep your grass short,
how do you cook chicken?
how do we eat dragonfruit?
How to Make Easy Workshop Cabinets
How to increase the water content of a piece of meat.
How to clean a fish globe?
To be safe when working with lye, you can
To get rid of under eye bags.
Purchasing a used car?
To prepare the false eyelashes for application,
How can you cure hiccups at home?
Remove greasy prints from walls.
How to make Tropical Pineapple Tarts at home.
folder
Eat a well balanced diet
Deter mosquitoes from camp fire.
To protect your car from scratches in your garage,
hot mitts
How to saute onion.
how do you file down a dogs teeth?
how to avoid paint spill when adding paint to your brush
Flour
how to measure liquids
To make a pastry crispier after it has gone soft,
slicer
stapler
How can I avoid nailing my thumb when starting a nail with a hammer?
To quickly peel tomato skins off of tomatoes,
Refresh old sand paper on an electric hand sander without spending additional money.
What materials are needed to make ganache?
To start chip carving,
Find a substitute for Rosemary for baking and cooking.
how to make a jicama-mango slaw
Remove stains from eye glasses.
How can I keep bathroom mirrors from fogging up?
To make a photocopy of a page in a book,
How can I tell if a watermelon will be watery?
How do you make a buttermilk substitute for pancakes?
Create extra compartment in handbag.
To clean your glasses easily,
Excavator
To attach batting to a wooden chair, you can
how do you shut off the wifi?
How do you crack hardwood floor?
a rumor
To make cucumber ribbons for salmon rolls.
How to secure two pieces of wood together.
garage
To force a turnover in football,
To comfort a homesick child while they're away at camp,
books
To mix salt and sugar together, you can
To eliminate the chance of sparks when cutting an aerosol can.
a shelf
Acetone
Prepare a wall to have a frameless mirror attached
What size box should I use to make a lego batman costume?
Add moisture to air.
metal bar
How do you dry nails fast after painting them?
spray paint
How do I open my garage
Carve words into wooden boards.
ornament
container
how do you eat boiled egg?
Cut a piece of screen to cover a car window
how to make a greek cucumber salad
Remove paper cover from a book.
To clean AirPods
Remove dents from carpet.
how do you tip a hat?
How do you light a match?
How to make Strawberry Kiwi Sauce at home.
magazine
how do you make a copy of a key?
to store cast iron pans so they stay dry
a sponge
How do you prepare paper for papier mache pulp?
How many legs do you need for a coffee table.
To design a exercise routine for the lower body you can do at home.
Learn to make my own condiment buffet for BBQ's.
How can I easily carry clothes on hangers when I move?
To add chocolate and caramel to hot milk and cream.
To make orange pulp from oranges.
Roast marshmallows.
A power washer
Where can I buy a tennis ball
how do you puncture a vein?
hands
What ingredients do I need to make a shortcrust for mini pies?
roast broccoli
To crimp the edges of the patsy crust.
magazine
sticks
To decrystallize  raw honey.
how do you wear a shawl?
How to fry a whole fish.
To ensure the jalapeno bread if cooked throughy
to lift something in the air?
what goes into peach strawberry yogurt?
Treat vaginal yeast infection at home.
video
How to make ice cream.
To make hard boiled eggs with easy to peel shells,
Reduce amount of candle wax dripping.
To make a breakfast burrito,
What to use to boil two gallons of liquid?
How can I secure marbles to a wooden fence?
how to water container plants
To make your pillow cooler at night,
tablet
How can I mark my rows of veggies in the garden in a unique way?
Sanitize toilet bowls.
To avoid making a mess in the oven,
How to remove a light bulb from a socket
how to wash delicate clothes
how to create storage at the campsite
To get your walls ready to paint,
Celebrate Christmas without room for a tree.
penny
eyes
coin
What supplies are needed to make a dream catcher wreath?
How many plants do I need to purify the air in my house
To hold a razor blade properly for shaving.
how do you elope?
Reduce flash from a camera.
To catch and kill a fly successfully,
How do I make orange icing if I have store-bought white frosting?
Clean electronics without leaving moisture.
how can I make DIY air dry clay for crafts?
Carve a Thanksgiving turkey.
push pin
Prevent grime under sink handles.
How to teach your dog down.
how to remove garlic odors from hands
to clean the tip of the ballpoint pen
To bleach your hair without using bleach,
How do I make an ice cream sundae
How to showcase a before and after of your project.
How do you close a tupperware container?
plastic wrap
use print screen
How many wheels should a skate board have?
back hoe
How do I fix the paper letter to the cover of the book ?
Increase shelf life of garlic.
To allow distress marks to show through the paint on the pallet board.
To keep pie crust dough from cracking as you roll it out.
rocks
Remove an ink stain
To prevent cookies from running into each other,
To turn on torch in a smart phone.
How do I cut a desired angle in the bamboo?
How to put sprinkles on a cake.
To crush the oreos for the graveyard  for dirt
How to clean the white wall tires.
baking sheet
To convince your husband to be more romantic,
To neutralize spicy foods.
make shoes stop hurting
How do you score a safety in football?
What are some tasty fall desserts to make?
When baking cupcakes, how can I tell if the cupcake is done in the middle.
Make an outdoor mattress.
To apply for government bursary.
To mix food coloring with sugar, you can
shovel
Make a face mask.
how do you rinse your mouth?
Mash bananas for banana bread
What sort of substance can be used to hold the pieces of a DIY project together?
Give a funeral to a deceased dog
How to Make a Stimulating Hair Mask
When making a two-sided mold, how do I make sure both sides are lined up with each other?
What do I do after muding and taping the seams when patching a hole in drywall?
To hang a painting on the wall,
How can I steam roasted chestnuts?
To attach smaller pieces of wood to a pallet, you can
highlighter
How to create a portal cake.
Create powdered calcium supplement.
How to finish the hem of your pants?
To make a nail inlay in blocks of wood.
Protect bird feeders from squirrels.
How do you bake small polymer clay sticks to make clay sprinkles?
how to make waffle pb&j
To send an email in GMAIL.
To make your floors more comfortable to walk on,
how can I raise a car window manually
how do you counteract on something?
How do I smooth the headphone after the headband was removed ?
To shoot skeet,
how do I get a sticker off of plastic?
How to get a room temp beverage cold faster
To make your beverage cold,
walls
make spicy honey mustard
butter knife
What types of sugar should be used when making pumpkin liqueur?
How to make white  Chocolate maple Crunch at home.
how do you break the fourth wall in a play?
At what temperature should you keep a BBQ when smoking food in a kettle BBQ?
To make a Bathroom access storage,
sand paper
To pick up pieces of broken glass without getting cut.
How do I combine wet and dry ingredients when making garlic naan?
Restore plastic solar cells so they will hold a charge
Where to install LED lights on your bike for greatest visibility by drivers?
How to make Blackberry syrup at home.
how to soften day old bread?
How to make fresh Cranberry syrup at home.
How to make soft boiled eggs?
how do you pin something?
To conserve electricity,
What material is good to make Origami Shuriken?
Sewing sides for the backpack
How to cook raw sausages
how do you blurt something out?
brick
To copy data on  a laptop.
pencil eraser
napkin
wash cloth
How do you lubricate plastic zippers?
To make shadow puppets,
teeth
How to use bike racks to take up less space in a garage?
Make a room smell diffuser.
To save money on books,
What can I use as a stencil in order to spray paint a design onto fabric?
Spray paint old chair without making a mess.
The main material you need to make a 3d birthday card is:
To make a ham and turkey sandwich,
How do I know if my yeast is ready when making croissants?
Remove flea infestation from carpet.
To have plenty of money to spend in the holiday season,
What tools do I need to make a cherry cheesecake twist?
How do I clean my white pillow cases and sheets?
how to clean window sills
how to keep cut vegetables from browning
how to make garlic lemon pasta
To treat a scrape or abrasion,
To connect the edges of the pie crust,
How do I measure how long to make a friendship bracelet?
how to make a homemade ant killer
To sweeten whipped egg whites,
How do you clean the surface of the glass?
What is the best way to prune plants?
How do you make a DIY garden gnome hat?
how do you stop shivering from being cold?
how to clean coils in your refrigerator
How can I smooth the edges of a copper sheet?
how do you smack something?
How to decrease the volume on Youtube
To chill warm bottles of beer quickly
What type of container should you store a salted caramel mix in?
Avoid frozen car doors.
Make organic glue.
How can make a stamp out of okra?
How to remove blood from jeans
how do you tip a watier?
To make a road trip across the USA eventful and fulfilling,
How can I make a long lasting candle at home?
how do you smile?
What is the best way to run so I can lose weight?
How should I mix the ingredients to make the dough for Thanksgiving rolls?
How to make homemade yogurt in an Instant Pot.
How to remove a mole
To speed up a video that is playing on YouTube,
What can I do to clean my shoelaces?
Label boxes for a move
Remove bacteria from feet before bed.
How do you make a kite?
To protect yourself from getting wet in a rainstorm,
neosporin
To remove a capacitor from a circuit board, you can
how do you make a bath?
To drill a hole in a computer case.
How can you cure Hiccups?
How to draw the outlines for halloween makeup?
how to turn on a faucet to cold?
How can I conceal scratches on a car?
mold
tape
What adding paint to a t-shirt what is the best method of application?
To attach two pieces of wood.
how to preserve pine cones
Patch a hole in a garden hose.
How can I prevent losing my charger in the dark?
How do I put varnish on the floor boards ?
How can you keep things worn at the gym from getting stinky?
To give wood a scorched look
To cut the legs off of a pair of pants, you can
Add shine to leather purse.
How do you prune a cranberry plant?
how do you scroll on a computer using the keyboard
To know when the frozen meat is defrosted
How to learn the names of the white piano keys.
How to make batteries fit in any remote?
What is the main ingredient needed for making chicken curry in a crock pot?
To store raw spaghetti without it going stale.
How to make Cherry Ice Cream at home.
To avoid damaging your curly hair,
How can I keep a hollow birdbath from tipping over?
Soften lumpy brown sugar.
To flip a pancake correctly
When you want to make earrings with wire and a stone, what kind of stone should you choose?
How to clean a Halloween costume made of rubber?
To keep disposable razors for longer periods of time,
How can I polish homemade earrings made from wire hangers?
Quickly transfer leftover cake to another place.
To jump from a moving car as safely as possible,
How to make a simple armrest on a computer desk?
What kind of cream should I use for my ice cream treat?
What if I need a usb plug in at a hotel and there isn't one there?
To install an emulator on an android TV.
strainer
post hole digger
check to see if the cake is done
How to rinse spinach leaves?
how to bend PVC pipe
how do you play imessage games?
To stop seeing things from a user on social media that you dislike,
How can I maximize space in a small work area?
painting
Make a trash bag dispenser.
how do you turn the page on a book?
pencil
To open factory sealed packages without hurting yourself.
To prevent spills from broken taco shells,
How do I package up something
prepare the space for the bridge
To make a strawberry smoothie
ribbon
To get rid of static cling when brushing your hair.
How to fix a stuck zipper.
How do I make my own Simple Window Cleaner at home?
What supplies are needed to make a bottle cap curtain?
skillet
dish towel
What can I use to make a dog toy?
container
To twist the wire used to make a bike sculpture out of wire.
how to prep nuts and spices for cooking
how do you make a habit of something?
how do you take a selfie?
how do you pay an ez pass transaction?
lounge
how to make a cucumber-herb dressing
How to make shoe hangers.
ribbon
lemon
To cut flowers
What's a good way to save leftover herbs.
machete
To apply melted butter to a tortilla, you can
To reduce the gas that beans cause after eating them,
How to keep a bench vise from moving?
how do you copy using your keyboard?
Remove pits from cherries.
To make your own dry shampoo,
To soothe your stomach after eating something spicy.
How to make Lamb and vegetable soup at home.
To cook mushrooms in a frying pan, you can
To inspire other people,
lemon
lid
Protect metal mailbox from corrosion.
Add more nutrients to compost.
To find a good thread for making friendship bracelets.
How to clean a glass stovetop.
To prepare a typical spray bottle for first time use containing house cleaning ingredients,
How can I keep car seats from getting hot in the sun?
How to properly open a wine bottle?
Make a bath for soft skin.
To have an interior lining for a makeup bag that is easy to clean.
how do you wear powder?
how do you make a banana split?
How to I untangle earphone cords?
television
What is a good use for a napkin folded into a basket?
To rehear fried chicken without softening it,
To eat grapes when your hands are dirty.
To win a baseball game,
To punch holes in puff pastry, you can
Increase length of shower curtain.
how do you set up an android phone?
how do you fasten a seat belt?
how do you test something out?
To prevent the 6 minute brownies from sticking to the pan
Remove bacteria from kitchen brush.
Find a lost dog.
straw
To prepare salmon for pan searing
To be safe when outside late at night, you can
What's the best way to heat up a cup of coffee fast?
I need some help with aphids they are eating everything in my garden.
What is a good material for a "Smashable" holder?
How do you pick a favorite movie?
What supplies are needed to make wooden block photos?
Keep mosquitoes away when camping.
how to stuff steak
trains
ice crusher
To drill holes in tongue and grove boards to attach them to the back of a bookcase.
Where can I buy bird feed
To prepare a pan for baking in the oven, it is important to
how do you secure yourself in a rollercoaster?
How to Clean Green Spot/Dust Algae off Aquarium Glass
To see sparks produced with a wintergreen flavored Lifesaver candy,
how do you add your bitmoji to your keyboard?
How to keep steak from tasting dry.
To get tomato paste out of the can easily
How do I protect the counter from the heat of the steam  iron ?
Prevent a rubber mallet from leaving black marks on a surface
Repel insects from skin.
How do you prep bananas for banana bread with walnuts.
rope
How to dust tv screens, computer monitors and any other screens around the home.
How to paint table.
how do you attempt something?
What can you do to reduce soreness during a workout?
When cooking pudding on the stove, to ensure that it doesn't burn
To make the eyes for a Batman Elseworld costume,
napkin
How do you make a fossil?
To get the best airfare deal,
to serve condiments at a BBQ
Rosin a violin bow
How to make Chocolate Tagalong Girl scout Ice Cream at home without an Ice cream Freezer.
One seeks to use plastic as a material.
What sort of bucket should I use to catch water from my gutters?
highlighter
How do I mix concrete?
Making Sure a Cheque is Cashable
To preserve ham salad in the refrigerator, you can
How to cook bacon so it is not oily?
What do you put on the base of a bike trailer hitch so that it moves?
how do you walk on a balance beam?
To remove the bolts from the assembly of a bike reflector, you can
how to raise your voice a few octaves
how to find the big dipper
How can I keep my brown sugar from hardening after opening?
To get your inkpen to work when it quits,
How to serve ice cream which is hard and difficult to scoop out?
How can I make my I phone Photos sharper?
To mark a line in the center of a board so it can be cut, you can
cement
how to brown meat quickly
Beach
To keep brown sugar soft.
To more easily fall asleep when people nearby are arguing,
how to make cottage cheese with cinnamon sugar toast
How can I annoy myself
To make sure the veneer doesn't split from the force from using a saw to cut them.
sanitize a cutting board
How do you grate cheese without a grater?
How can you clean a blender very quickly and easily?
To silence a squeaky bi fold door
Prevent muscle cramps after a workout.
to unstick a zipper
Hang a plant in a covered porch.
lighter
To get a photo of yourself on vacation when you're by your self,
Make a bumpy hilly lawn flat again.Rid of all the unwanted weeds as well.
how to warm up soil
wipes
screwdriver
how to make pizza sticks
To hide a spare key near your house, you can
cardboard box
Make watermelon sorbet.
hydraulic press
How to remove a stripped screw
cup
Prevent infestation of cutting insects on trees.
how do you showsomeone speaking in asentence?
To make spiced salt
What type of paint should be used to paint your bell?
how to secure a snake tank?
How to Make In-N-Out Double Double Cheeseburger Copycat
To keep matchstick strike paper on the small glass bottle while the glue dries
To remove the moisture from lettuce after washing it, you can
How can I tidy up a sweater that is piling and disfigured?
How do I cut an intricate pattern from 2mm acrylic?
How to do a back somersault.
Where would you secure the hand and foot holds when building a climbing wall?
spicy fried rice
One seeks to build a trailer.
Remove smell from shoes.
fingernail
To prevent hair breakage.
To connect pieces of fabric together cleanly what can I use?
To fill the honey sticks with honey.
To cast a desktop screen on a secondary display
To lay out sandblasting design onto glass bottles.
Where can I buy a front door
how do you butter bread?
To increase chances of lucid dreams.
To remove the rough edges of a wooden frame, you can
How do you make butterfly wall art from scrapbook paper?
How to get rid of bees from a bee hive?
To prevent overfilling the jars with homemade dog food
How to make perfect rice.
To make a hamburger,
tissue
desk
how do you caress something?
To prepare vegetables for a fajita.
how do I make damper?
How do you clean glass shower doors?
Making a ringed locket for men.
Fix loose wall screw.
Avoid overcooked meat.
To help prevent the spreading of cookie dough while it's baking.
What if you accidentally pop your balloon at Disney land and your kids starts crying?
Seal snack bags.
To reduce bacon shrinkage
how do you use a sleep mask?
how to get rid of bed bugs
Prevent auto flushing of public toilets.
To find studs in a wall, you can
how do you puncture a ball?
To cook minute rice on the stove top,
knife
make butter in a jar
How do you air up a flat bicycle tire?
how do you soften macaroni shells?
Increase life of cut flowers.
To make small jell-o square for assembling into watermelon slice jell-o shots.
Stay hydrated during trip.
To make a colorful and fun salt for art projects
Remove scratches from plates
how to make chicken with pesto
Handmade pesto for a party.
how to create an egg wash
How to make Mandarin orange syrup at home.
how do you keep a matress dry in case of accidents?
Make an enrichment toy for your dog
To fix a frozen computer,
how to revive brown sugar
To clean using a vacuum cleaner.
How do I connect two pieces of PVC pipe together?
Take out blood stain from sofa.
Create mini bounce area for toddler.
How to sterilize a baby bottle.
How can I soothe a chigger bite?
Make the last of body wash easier to dispense.
To remove a piece of metal from a liquid solution inside a glass jar, you can
Scrape the bark off a small tree branch
One seeks to get organized in the kitchen.
To put out a kitchen fire,
To cut hearts from a piece of felt, you can
how do you count on your fingers?
Clear up hazy car headlights.
To determine the length of a board, you can
Increase alertness.
how do you bronze your face?
What do I do if I forget to defrost the phyllo dough overnight before making baklava?
To create a brick foundation for your oven.
make belt fasten
To remember what you need to buy at the grocery
Easily dissolve jello mix in water.
How to wash a fork.
Get cheap whiteboards
To check if batteries are good or bad.
how to dust a leather jacket
How to wash windows.
How do I get my car to look fresh and shiny?
To create a seed starter from an eggshell half,
To seal the ends of paracord after knotting them together, you can
Sanitize recycling bin.
Cover up screw holes in legs of plywood bed.
How to Prepare Colored Water for Burning Candle, Rising Water experiment
how to revive stale bread
I need a fastener that will be good to complete and enclose a wooden iphone case.
how do you project vocally?
How do I ensure that my hamburger is cooked enough that any e. coli bacteria are killed?
How do I prevent the wood from splitting when making a worm bin?
To make it easier to carry a backpack while camping
how to make a cheese ball dip
How to build a headboard for your bed.
To cut a precise circle out of a piece of wood, you can
How to turn ketchup into pizza sauce.
Prevent leftover pizza from getting a soggy crust.
How to Make Huckleberry cobbler at home.
saw
jug
How do I play a game on the xbox one
machine
How to pause a video on Youtube
how do you use a tealight?
To clean a ceramic cook top.
What part of a pine apple do you place in water to begin growing a pineapple plant?
To completely tighten the screw that anchors a cord in place, you can
Make a splash guard for mixer.
How can I make lipstick at home?
To make sure that cocoa powder doesn't leave any lumps in batter.
Make a wooden desk.
How do I make a positive impact in my community
How do you cut drywall?
How do I split wood with a splitting maul?
To get the cheese to melt on my bagel.
To make sculpting clay easier to sculpt with.
How to clean the dirt under your nails.
how to keep mosquitos away while camping
How to prepare the perfect scrambled eggs.
clean a Nintendo Switch screen
How can I get vacuum hose connections to fit when they are loose?
Make an impromptu frost or ice scraper for your windshield or windscreen.
To record audio clearly.
To make butter, you can
how do you fill up your queue on mturk?
how to blanch vegetables
How do you slice an orange?
How to toast bread without an oven or a toaster?
how do you cast a shadow?
how to remove garlic odor from hands
How do you determine man vs zone defense in football?
to not share your things?
Remove a pizza that is cooking directly on an oven rack.
How to make a bike trailer.
Assemble a kabob on a skewer
assemble model cars
aluminum foil
how to make a vinaigrette
How do I get mice out of an old shed?
Make the orange pomander smell more
oil
Learn how to color the cream centers of Oreos for a food craft.
How to apply blush on cheeks.
how do you cast spotify music to your tv?
smoke a pork butt
To see Bill in Sector X in Star Fox 64.
Avoid losing class schedules.
How can I kill the germs and bacteria in my sponge I use to clean with?
To distemper steel, you can
After you paint your room
To use a yubi key or similar smart card.
What do I need to prep to make a Mimosa?
Make a wooden bike rack.
make a lamborn drink
duct tape
Check if ice cream was stored correctly before buying.
To inflame the surface of your skin on fire without burning yourself,
How do I clean the keys of my oboe?
To determine the exact weight of almond flour, you can
Monitor your baby in the back seat
How accurate are gauge blocks?
How to prepare violets for being candied.
q-tip
roller brush
Why do nuts cause allergic reactions in some people?
Remove snow from dog paws.
Make gardening scoop.
To read more quickly when you feel slow,
dust
To make a mouse-pad, what should I use for the bottom of it?
Prepare a fish tank for fish to live in.
How to add color to play dough for kids without using food dye?
blanket
how do you wear a satchel?
how to make a tomato with mint salad
Get to know your new neighborhood
How to make an egg white and honey face mask?
How do you make ant traps?
How do you clean a tablet screen?
How to prevent a drill bit from wandering when drilling metal.
tube
how to keep milk from curdling in tea
How do you clean copper pennies?
what to do with excess fruit
How to take a video with an android phone
If I just want the top to get heated on my pizza bread, how can I do that?
Clean porcelain with mild cleanser.
rags
pins
How to store leftover cake
To add a tangy taste to cooked pineapple, you can
How to Make a Mug Brownie
Cut biscuit shapes.
How do you wash a wine glass?
To cut thin, threaded steel rods.
how do you make a dirty steak?
How do you prepare a pan for frying a steak?
To make a bicycle's chain less squeaky,
To smooth the edges of the pieces
How to throw garbage out
To cream butter and sugar together, you can
Make tiny photo frame.
remote
sewing machine
Where can I rent a movie
how do I make thousand island dressing at home?
towels
Remove scratches from a cell phone screen easily.
how do you grow a plant?
Cutting the slots
To have extra duct tape for emergencies
t-shirt
How can I keep bugs away while camping?
how to dry lingerie
How to apply Mehendi Henna dye to skin
How to dig post holes.
fist
Make plant fertilizer.
How long should I let hamburger patties rest after grilling?
How to Transform Your Body
To bone a chicken thigh
To make moving the ramekins in and out of the over
To remove dust from a silicone mold, you can
How to turn on a tv with a remote
How do I keep my towels white?
How do you obtain green molding plastic from old toys?
crossing out
where is the constellation Centaraus located
hands
how do I find the Cygnus constellation
decorative air freshener
Shoe
To relieve clogged noses and ears
nothing
To transfer the cowboy cookies to a wire rack after cookie
how do you rush to do something?
Getting nauseous from reading in a car?
To clean a car windshield covered in snow.
how do you pay a bill over the phone?
How do you grow Roses?
fishing box
oil
To grow herbs in your garden.
Provide enough soil for a tomato plant to fruit in a pot on the deck.
To save the last sliver of bar soap.
how to make pesto chicken salad
ledge
How to store the peanut butter cups after making them?
how do you screw a screw into wood?
To make chocolate bowls.
paintbrush
To keep toys withing reach of a child inside of a bathtub,
How can you turn an egg carton into a decoration?
How should I make the hole in my cornhold board?
How to hand someone a knife
To store the cooked cauliflower tortillas
Make homemade air freshener.
How to smudge the writing of an ink pen on a paper?
earring back
How do I pack fragile and breakable items into a suitcase?
Fasten two wooden boards together to make a thicker board.
To prevent tools from falling off the wall when you store them, you can
How to turn an espresso into an americano?
Clean cradle cap on baby's head.
How do you tenderize and clean dogbane fiber for rope making?
Hide cash in common purse items to prevent thieves from stealing it.
how to clean strawberreis
q-tip
In order to keep a mask snug on your face,
get extra boost
Add tea flavor to noodles.
How to make Rice Crisp Fantasy Fudge crunch at home.
What can I use to make parchment paper?
To protect your skin from harm in the sun
To make shoulder armor template thick.
How do you make magnetic silly putty?
brick
To mix water and flour together, you can
To prevent guitar picks from getting lost,
How do I clean off headlights on an automobile?
How can you clean up spilled nail polish quickly?
how do you use a toilet paper piece?
penny
tree stand
Spray paint a specific area of an object.
Add outdoor theme to kitchen.
Keep gelatin from sticking to the side of the mold.
How can I keep mosquitoes from biting me?
In order not get a bladder or infection,
table
Reuse zip ties using a pin to release the ratchet using a pin or a needle. Fillthe comparments with packing peanust or something heavier, even a pool noodle cut
To prepare a mason jar for apple iced tea.
To attach the wooden sides of a box together, you can
How to see bright of stars at night.
How to make pepperoni pizza bread
how do you trick someone?
Where can I watch live tv shows
To save room when storing beer cans.
how do you make a check valid?
To strengthen a wooden box, you can
How to make your necklace string?
skirt
go crabbing
How do I check my email
To create an accessibility ramp for a motor home.
How do you cut a screw in half?
How can I make a cool candle holder?
To remove finish from a sheet of plywood, you can
how do you peel potatos?
Make your mattress smell clean.
to remove grease stains from clothing
How to prevent a wooden work desk from incurring drink stains?
How do you stop throwing up?
How to fall asleep faster
To create ribbons of egg in ramen soup.
How large should you make the tool shelf?
Where do you find a steel web strongly enough to support child's body weight?
Keep your stored documents from creasing
To make use of old brown bananas,
To bake muffins in the oven, you can
When cooking apples for a pie filling,
Learn how to weather and distress a wood project.
To make cheap red dye,
How do you choose a sport to play?
To fill a cupcake tin with cupcake batter.
table
pail
grater
I would like to create a garden on my balcony. What is the first thing I should do?
How can I easily organize my shower accessories and soaps?
How do I deter ants from my home?
how to make kasha with sweet potatoes
Remove dirt from a cardboard box
how to easily apply eyelash glue
How can I get my cat's pee stain out of my sheets?
How to clean washing machine?
To carve out wood from a design
To make Limoncello Pie, you'll need
how do you make a taco?
how to airdrop photos
What is the first thing to do when making Rice Krispy treats?
Remove odor from shoes.
How do you hang up  mirror?
How to make butter with a whisk?
a tarp
To inject glue into cracks of wood without making a mess.
razor
How can I open a wine bottle without a corkscrew?
bat
fire
How to remove a stuck ring safely.
floss
Nails
Prevent mildew on kitchen tiles.
scissors
how do you turn on the lights in a house?
Reduce oil in sauces.
To seal bare wood in furniture,
How to cream butter and sugar together.
shovel
To save time when looking for your car in a parking lot,
To create a cured look to wood for an antique finish.
how to make fettuccine carbanara
Keep button threads from unraveling.
how do you blow a gum bubble?
To find a community online that you will like,
To make homemade berry ice cream.
How long do you keep braiding for in a paracord from the first buckle?
How to prevent spills when painting a wall?
To clean suede Ugg boots.
how do you snort?
Make a helper for starting a camp fire.
How do you make shampoo?
How do I format an external hard drive?
How can I hire people to do my lawn
How to open and close jump ring for earrings
how to do a depth measure on your drill bit
how can you check if an iphone is the iphone x?
how do you make a gel pen write?
How to create a jack o lantern
How can I measure something quickly at home?
To get the loaf pan ready for baking chocolate bread.
Cut thin slices of bread.
Remove marks on keyboards.
To make america great again.
How can I get rid of  a stomachache?
box cutter
To kill all vegetation in a certain area,
plunger
To cut the bell pepper,
Make a quick grocery list.
How to remove gum from hair?
To trim drinking straws to be used as honey sticks.
To use a push pin.
re purpose an old wheelbarrow
Roll paper strips
Keep roaches away from kitchen.
How to melt cheese in microwave
net
rod
how to make pimiento macaroni salad
To protect yourself from muscle strains while excercising,
To clean your game controller,
To create a strap for a bag that is made from pants.
How can I get rid of fungus of finger or toe nails?
Reduce shrinkage of bacon.
Mark walking trail.
To remove fingerprints from clay.
To tread water,
counter
To make dough firm and easier to slice, you can
How to clean the tongue of a shoe.
How can I preserve flowers?
To combine wet and dry ingredients together for a recipe, you can
baby powder
oil
Reduce sore muscles during workout.
To make cottage cheese or sour cream last longer,
When filling your car with gas
To make a water heater more efficient.
How to poke a hole on a metallic can?
To drill holes large enough for coin sized magnets to fit inside, you can
Easily create a reminder on your desktop in Windows.
Mark end of a tape roll.
How to make a template for DIY Paper Leaves
To get rid of bruises naturally.
How to make a nice fence
To cut rotisserie chicken quickly.
To obtain small shreds of ginger, you can
To attach metal hooks to a wooden gun rack, you can
how do you help cracked nipples?
To get wooden posts to stay in the ground, you can
To make homemade shampoo
How to make freeze pops
How can I keep a gap between the wood while decking?
how to keep colors from fading in the washer
To clean a coffee pot,
To create a lighter paint texture in a painting,
What is the most important step when making the best nachos ever?
How to Deal With Excessive Sweating (Hyperhydrosis) on Holiday
Eliminate dust from under the best.
To improve your focus while doing math homework,
To make Beaker Costume from the muppets
To trace out the shapes over the wooded board to be cut.
how do you keep your butt in place under jeans?
How to make chocolate cream pie.
To make hard boiled eggs easier to peel.
To measure rice
To solve a puzzle,
Eat spicy food without coughing.
detergents
How do you cut cheese properly off a cheese wheel?
To soften butter for baking if you forget to take it out of the fridge beforehand.
How to make vanilla pudding at home.
How to cook a hotdog in a microwave
Change the color of a burlap bag.
to prevent failure when you drill a hole on metal box
How do you tenderize meat?
how to make a great meal
how do you get your food at a drive thru?
Avoid sticky snow on sidewalk.
How to connect to a WiFi network
To get tomatoes to grow in your back yard?
To thaw frozen phyllo dough,
How can I get an annoying song out of my head?
how do you obliviate something?
What kind of metal bars should you use to make a lighter weight metal table?
Make a paper dust pan.
Remove sweat stains from shirts
how do I meditate for relaxation?
How do you give dogs dry food?
How to eat sushi properly
To get  get super-creative with this tasty cake
How to make frames for small photographic slides.
how to make double-dipped strawberries
To lose weight without changing your diet or exercising,
What do you do to survive a shark attack?
To cut the top part of a soda can off.
How can you prevent a dog from pulling on its leash?
To stop the high pitch noise when plugging in an aux cord.
To see if alterations are needed early on when making your own wedding dress.
candle
To clean the inside of my car?
Make water bombs.
flowers
To get home made gum drops to harden.
how to bring out the flavor of pizza
How can I soften chocolate that has hardened?
To widen a hole in the side of a plastic pipe, you can
What is a way to make your essay longer?
Speed up paint roller jobs.
How to cook easy mac.
Make a bag of trail mix.
how to make pickled beet and egg toast
To remove the dust from a computer motherboard.
To apply fake hair to adhesive on a prosthetic werewolf mask.
Fireplace
watering can
To make a S'more in a cone,
How to Eat Food With New or Tightened Braces
To make brown sugar when you run out of it,
how do you collaberate with someone?
wood
How to make tinder for fires at home?
To test the drill stand.
To stop brain freeze when eating cold food,
What is an alternative to painting your pool?
Make a glass butterfly feeder.
To polish silverware at home,
How to make Big Red Slurpees at home.
How can I remove gum from carpet?
To install an intercooler on an Xbox 360.
socket
Organize clothes closet.
how do you delete an app on an iphone?
How do you separate a dried hickory nut from its shell?
broom
What type of food can I use meat sauce on?
easily poach a bunch of eggs
what is felted soap?
To make a spooky glowing jar for Halloween
how to say I love you nonverbally?
How to dice up an apple.
how do you pop a gum bubble?
What should you do if a mango is rock hard?
pen
How to find a 90 degree angle on a board without a speed square?
how to easily peel potatoes.
How do you cut out a pattern that has been traced onto leather for a leather wallet?
How to cut small branches.
Make edible skewers for lamb.
To prevent your hand from getting stained with gel coloring
fingernails
how to make chorizo potato salad
How to clean your LEGOs?
When making butter cookies, do I need to chill the tray before placing in the oven?
To dry paper mache quickly
how to easily cut kiwi
How to prepare a basement wall before painting it to waterproof the wall?
How to make Maple Nut Fantasy fudge at home.
Add storage to under mattress.
To put speakers on a bicyle
How do you identify dogbane plants that would be good for making rope?
Before baking muffins, you should
How to make a return at a store.
To attach metal leads to a circuit board, you can
hammer
What equipment will I need to make garlic aioli?
Prevent zipper from sliding down.
Make mini greenhouse for new plants.
Catch flies in the kitchen.
To use sonar on your game boy color to detect fish.
how to make white chooclate chai
How does companion planting help reduce pests and increase production ?
Steps to Pit Cherries
To prepare freshly fried turkey for slicing,
Keep gym bag smelling fresh.
How to add a rustic look to wood furniture?
chair
To slice a mango in half,
Scrub windows without leaving lint.
to cure a tension headache in seconds
How to remove nail polish from carpet
To store dough before baking it, you can
Water
To measure the attic to be covered with insulating barrier.
Cover a pillow.
How to cut off a soda bottle neck.
Make a mug cake
To make your own instrument,
how do you overflow a cup?
What can I use to stain a wooden coaster?
ladle
get more flavor out of nutmeg
how do you turn on the screen on an iphone?
To report mildly suspicious activity to law enforcement,
how do you screenrecord on an iphone?
To write on plastic
How can you tell if the person standing near you and speaking to you really wants to be there and talk to you or wants to leave?
To create a planter that wicks moisture to the roots of the plants, you can
How to deep clean an oven.
under arm
bobby pin
How do you set up an aquarium for African Shell Dwelling Cichlids?
Chop cloves of garlic.
paint
To protect your cell phone from damage.
To stay dry in a rain storm,
How do you run a screen route in football?
How do I get a zipper unstuck?
Extend life of damaged rug.
How to make a simple herb holder?
How to secure a battery case for a solar charger.
how do you tie your hair up?
tin foil
In order to split apart uncooked Pillsbury Grands Flaky Layers Biscuits,
To provide power to your television,
How do I take a selfie with really good lighting?
hands
How to prewash towel fabric.
How do I make my eyes less red?
To get out of debt,
To juggle 3 balls,
Out of fish line for your weed eater
To keep paint off of the side of a paint can.
how to enhance the flavor of a cake
How can I clean my toilet?
whistle
paper cutter
To protect your eyes when cutting glass, you can
If you want to cook veggies in a crockpot for a shorter amount of time, you should
Light a match in windy environment.
What sort of rocks should I use for a simple rock garden?
To paint the walls over your home,
How to sweeten coffee with no calories?
How can I get my ear clean?
bowl
How do I clean my car's floor mats?
how to open closed flower buds
To draw a circle on a piece of wood, you can
To crush bananas down into a mush for a recipe, you can
To avoid ruining your kid's clothes when they eat something messy,
spoon
How do I get my laundry to smell good?
To carve small designs into the surface of wood, you can
paperweight
Make pickled carrots.
Clean a pumpkin to make a Jack o lantern.
how do you take off a one piece swimsuit?
Which end of a knife to you hold to throw it at target.
To make homemade chalk the standard tube shape.
patio
To find local garage sales,
what do I do with dahlias after they bloom?
How to nourish skin and lubricate razor before shaving.
how do you counter an uppercut?
Find studs behind wall.
life boat
Hydrate parched skin.
Pick of last line of dust that dust pan can't collect.
How can I store my disposable new earplugs?
Take out silk from corn husks.
To prop up you phone to watch things
How to prepare berries for raspberry lemonade.
how to keep ginger
DIY dry skin mask
Make a beer holder for outdoor concerts.
What size baking pan should you use for homemade mars bars?
How can I keep from getting shocked by static electricity?
stove
how do you deny something?
vise grips
How to prepare potato witch fingers for the oven?
How to add the sides of your DIY swamp cooler?
how do you override something?
How can you encompass fruit in chocolate.
Prevent kneecap burns on babies.
Shine a pair of shoes.
How to Make a Crustless Custard Pie
How to Smooth Lawn Dice
how to make rice with green beans and almonds
Make eye lashes thicker
To find an alternate use for simple syrup with sugar and water.
To celebrate your birthday,
How to easily drift off to sleep
Make a hand puppet.
How to remove creases from paper?
How to make a DNA strand shape using paper?
What kind of stitches should I use when sewing together a beanie?
Prevent water spots on sink faucet.
straw
can
How do you defrost frozen meat quickly?
Make fabric nest for birds.
How can you tell if someone is lying?
To clean an optical mouse
paper clip
To use a bookmark.
keep cabinet door closed
how do you button something?
How to secure heart cut out to card.
how do you train a puppy?
To cut PVC to a predefined length, you can
How to clean a grill grate?
how are craters formed on the moon
letters
How to use a tennis ball to massage sore muscles?
How to isolate the puncture in a bicycle tire?
To prevent cupcakes from sticking to a tray, you can
fingernail
Create garden edging.
how do you paint with thread?
How to make an Old Fashioned cocktail?
How to cut straws the same size.
colander
In what order do you mix ingredients for buttercream frosting?
To tell if baking soda is still fresh in your pantry,
To mash down a box to put it out for the recycling.
To prepare a dragon fruit
To create vents to allow steam to escape from a pie crust.
Charmer
Pamper your feet.
To apply oil to wood to give it a nice finish, you can
grow tomatoes in a pot
To bake muffins without muffin tins.
Clean kitty litter trays easily.
To prevent ice cream from becoming hard in the freezer,
how do you turn on a charger?
To heighten and add to the flavor of queso made with American cheese,
Store multiple Barbie dolls.
sweat band
How to make Turkey Gravy at home.
Preparing to Make a Tough Decision
What can I do to make my juice less sweet?
To keep a door from latching
How to flush the toilet.
How to finish the base of wood.
how do you make a toaster strudel
How to patch sidewalks and driveways.
Prevent cold drafts under doors.
What to do to remove pulp from grapes and lemons?
To remove lint from clothes
What can I use to remove a screw without a screwdriver?
how do you make the bath water hot?
how to pit an avocado
How to easily slice baby tomatoes?
a hammer
kettle corn brownies
leggings
To cook rice until it is a perfect consistency, you can
To reuse a shoelace if you are tossing the shoes out.
how do you rinse something?
How to remember dreams.
paint
Prevent melting plastic with a light bulb.
To remove body hair.
To draw mosquitoes away from you in an infested area,
How to change the filter for your air conditioner in your car.
flea medication
How to prevent a laptop from overheating?
To get a trading card graded accurately.
Where to go to lodge a criminal complaint?
keep cauliflower white after cooking
How do I dip the ladyfingers when making eggless tiramisu?
Keep the candle from dripping was onto the centerpiece
how do you heal cracked hands?
What supplies are needed to make a floral window decoration?
how do you shoot a basket?
Have packages delivered discreetly.
how to make seafood risotto
wheelbarrow 
Make egg shells fall off easily after boil.
clothes pin
razor blade
ladle
Where should you look to find the base you need to make a portable bar stool?
how to start a car
To make the shape for the sweetheart cake
To measure a TV screen,
To heat dough to help the ingredients mix
How do you boil chicken?
cereal box
How can I remove hinges from an old cabinet?
shirt
Bake cupcakes out of a cake mix
how do you trail someone?
How do I mix my ingredients when making oatmeal pie?
board
ladle
Prevent hard taco shells from breaking.
how do you cut fruit?
Use a calendar to mark important dates
how do you take someone on a dinner date?
What can I use to store my small tools in the workshop?
how do I make a trifle with bananas and berries?
How do I disassemble a steamer trunk?
How can I attach pieces of leather together?
canister
Make knife holder for camping.
Where can I go to buy beer
how to keep burgers from puffing up in the middle.
To tie a fisherman's knot,
To reverse the effect when your car starts to overheat.
how do you take a baby home from the hospital?
How do you remove the secondary winding on the transformer?
how do you order a large drink at starbucks?
how to identify poison ivy
To get water ready to mix jello packs into it.
Blood samples
How to drain water from pasta.
stool
To keep the bottoms of your feet smooth,
To have an extra fail safe for if the jack fails on a raised car you're working on.
Remove the black vein from the cavity of a fish.
To spot a fake US bill.
Sew a cover for your curling iron.
To remove coffee stains from your teeth,
How do I thaw out bacon?
Lighten a dark scar on the skin.
box
Learn how to finish off a tote bag made out of toilet paper rolls.
To charge a portable computer,
How can I make a cookie dough that can be eaten raw?
How to re-use old newspapers as fireplace logs.
t-shirt
How do I make sure my tent stays up securely?
How to finish off a french braid.
What do I need to mash the potatoes?
To prevent concrete doesn't get stuck in wooden corners, you can
To make the domino dots on the domino cookies
How do you use a soldering iron?
how to make olives taste better
How can you drive a stake into the ground?
how to make maple walnuts
How much solder should I use for soldering copper pipes when working on a plumbing project?
Create cream cheese frosting.
To melt the surface of foam, you can
How to Get Rid of Lower Belly Fat
Apply masking tape quickly during paint job.
Prevent cold wind under doors.
razor
How can I store my shower creams for easy access?
How to remove seeds from an orange?
To make an origami heart out of a dollar bill.
how to make miso-tofu salad
how to open a coconut in the oven
Prevent bees from buzzing around house.
clamp
To clean the exterior of an oyster
logs
Make it easier to insert new trash bag.
How do I get my mascara to not be dry?
how do you eat an apple?
To waterproof a lighter.
how to keep birds off my plants?
how do you sign a letter?
To spray paint the spiderweb to be used as a stencil.
How to make the best porridge?
Prevent car door from hitting garage wall.
How to prepare copper pipe for soldering?
What is the best way to add a belt buckle to a leather belt?
how do you plow snow?
To recycle a food container,
How to shave your face
How do you cut a 12 inch piece of wood?
What makes a snickerdoodle a "snicker poodle?"
blow torch
hook
To flavor your coffee without sugar,
How do I get rid of a default Google account?
fake beard
How do I sand the wood?
To make sure Pomegranate Vodka is being infused properly
how do you turn your break lights off?
How to make a hand soap bottle with floating LEGOs?
How do you make a birdseed pine cone?
How do you cook boiled yams?
How do I sculpt leather?
I need to keep the birds off my raspberry bushes.
How can I keep christmas lights from getting tangled?
To attach 2X4s together, you can
Prevent slugs in garden.
How do you hang a calendar?
make mexican rice salad
To drill out the center of a quarter using a hand drill.
how do you pack a backpack?
To save money when moving
how do you stop a soda from foaming?
how do you sanitize something?
To remove excess glue from thin wood pieces used in art.
two forks
how do you palm a ball?
How do I make good burger patties?
how do you win at the silent game?
To apply epoxy to a piece of metal, you can
how to make a bit holder for your drill
To make boundary clearly visible on felt when tracing a circle onto the felt.
How do I cut the wood for the legs of the tripod?
When replacing the sisal rope on a cat tree, where should I apply hot glue?
To score a goal in soccer,
How can I get some grime from under my fingernails?
napkin
When painting leaves that have been preserved in glycerin,
how do you put weight on your bones?
make shiv
Make a quick fire starer.
Make a drip catcher for popsciples.
How to remove a staple without a removal tool?
Remove scratches from glass
An industrial crane
To insulate the inside of a wooden doghouse.
How to I prepare the pan when cooking creamy chocolate coffee torte?
When making a small hand thrown pottery bowl, open your clay,
metal tray
How to remove refrigerator odors.
How can I get change for a dollar in a vending machine without buying anything?
How to make a playlist.
Cook pasta
how do you clean your belly button?
To stop people from stealing your pens.
To flatten and thin metal bolt heads.
To make a pretend christmas tree fit into a plastic globe
What is a common material used to make a bifold wallet?
Use washing soda for cleaner clothes
How to know when pork tenderloin is done.
peeler
To feel more bonded as a family,
How to drive away bees and mosquito from a deck?
how to play tic-tac-toe
Freezors
How can I tell if a hard boiled egg is cooked completely without breaking it?
To layer the dinosaur cake,
How do you organize a book shelf?
Keep Table legs from scratching the floor.
How do I dry eggs after being boiled?
To plant a cuttling in a net cup
how to put on lipstick?
What is needed to make a sloth cake?
How can I freshen breath without mouthwash?
how do you know you need gas in a car?
To flatten your stomach,
how do you look at your profile on instagram?
binder clip
how to make crisp and paper like folds?
fishing line
Before planting seeds, you can
How much flux should I apply to a copper pipe before soldering for a plumbing project
To remove wrinkles from lighter clothing
How to make a bracelet from a guitar string.
how do you jeapordize something?
To prevent painful feelings when playing the guitar,
One seeks to do some screw tapping.
To prevent meat from burning when cooking it in foil,
How do you remove super glue from your teeth?
How do you find the volume of a rectangle?
DIY speaker for a phone
how to make buttermilk
How to properly disinfect a bathroom?
To move new suitcases without damaging them.
To remove a deep groove from a wooden skateboard, you can
stool
how do you go to sleep
bucket
how do you scamper?
How to polish a CD
To fry eggs, you can
How do I keep mice from getting into the insulation when building a sun room addition?
chisel
how do you exhale?
How do I get lost online
Make home made yogurt from store bought starter.
To make locking your door an easier to remember task,
How do I make a guitar shinier?
To install a laser printer.
blanch green beans
How to make the dough for your chocolate heavens?
What can happen if you don't remove a tick right away?
how to clean up vomit
How to make simple holes to attach to pieces of leather together?
Quickly freshen up clothes without wash.
how do you know how much time you have left on a hit on mturk?
How do you paint with chocolate?
clamp
How can your preserve logos and designs on clothes?
Organize your moving boxes
How to make fried chicken in the oven?
One wants to make Mexican Carne Guisada.
pocket knife
how to clean a saw blade
To create pockets in wood, you can
icing
tablet
Where can I get wood planks to make a bookcase?
How can I make red sauce less acidic?
To save money on printer ink cartridges,
How to increase the volume on VLC media player
How can I freshen up my shower?
Recycle broken plastic forks in plant nursery.
How can I remove nails when their heads break off?
How do you smooth the edges of a pop can when turning it into a cup?
Remove new paint smell.
To ice the of the mushroom cookies
how to make shirley temple punch
One seeks to re-purpose wood for a gift.
use a toothbrush to clean your teeth
how do you jump someone?
To make fresh dill flavored chips
To keep a container of mints closed and secure,
To hold wicks in place will candle wax is hardening.
To make a  great jack and coke.
Build a child size rocking horse.That will last many years.
To know when a cake is done and you don't have toothpicks.
To create the red colored ring around a cooked brisket,
To cook hotdogs
How long is a turkey generally smoked for?
How do you apply eye shadow?
how to clean window screens
couch
how do you finish a hair braid?
Remove onion odor from hands.
how do you keep a cat from going in heat?
How do I make a berry jam for eating with a nutella mousse?
How to mow a very steep lawn on the edge of a busy street?
To preserve battery when it is running low on a phone,
To trim the ends of your chocolate log cake,
How to make your chicken wrap?
After you turn the heat off when cooking fudge, you should
What should you coat the almonds in for the cookies?
tack
how to make a mop substitute
Clean a chopping block.
Hang a shelf straight.
To chop fresh herbs.
To waterproof wood
How do I insulate windows with plastic for the winter?
What should I do if a bee lands on me?
how do I freeze coconut milk?
how do you use a baby gate?
Can you find tape that isn't sticky?
how do you escort someone?
hook
How to Store Easy Homemade Butter in the refrigerator
To get wrinkles out of clothing,
Prevent creases on pants.
Use emergency sunburn treatment.
sturdy bridge
How to make green paint
To prepare a pan for baking, you can
How to clean a scuff off of a car bumper
how do you create resin in a pipe?
To transfer the ink onto the roller,
To trace a template to make a paper tree.
make screwdriver
To set a wrist watch,
how to descale a coffee maker
how do you paint with light?
shovel
To gain re-entry to the united states after traveling abroad,
How to clean floor.
How to create squares to Assemble a Foam Cube Truss Bridge.
jackhammer
how do you pack clothes?
How do I coat the veneer sheet with glue ?
How to divide an office or study cheaply?
To strengthen paper after printing it for a project, you can
chipper
How to cut out cardboard to resemble R2D2's legs.
To substitute for butter in a cookie recipe,
Calm mind before sleep.
How to infuse milk with coffee flavor?
To get rid of dandruff.
To get rid of a telemarketr
vise
make a desk
how do you shrug something off?
Use edible kindling.
how do you document something?
How do you tell if a cake is finished baking?
To get permanent marker off of your body.
To make a crunchy taco shell out of a flour tortilla,
To get a nail to stay in a wall, you can
How to easily pack socks into a suitcase?
To create a surface to wipe a paint brush on without the paint running off the side of the can,
How much do I pay the minister for doing the wedding service?
Get a free cup of coffee.
How do you perform Russian Twists?
How can I keep cardboard fastened to a jig while cutting?
dog costumes
How do you fill a gumball machine?
find the key to flakey pie crust.
How to ensure that the money you make is secure?
Force sneeze to come out.
How do I season a steak?
How to remove garlic smell from your hands after chopping cloves of garlic.
Make a soft ice pack.
hands
What supplies are needed to make a cardboard pirate ship?
Reduce effects of insomnia.
How to remove carpet stains on stairs.
A quick and dirty stand for your smartphone
binder clip
How do I apply finish to a wooden worm bin?
How to turn off bluetooth on Windows 10
How to Make Pickled Peaches
What can you substitute for eggs when you are baking cookies?
One wishes to reuse some lumber they have.
how to make chocolate-raspberry wreaths
hand
How to do a pull-up.
To sink a ship full of pirates.
how do you make a candy apple?
How can you prevent being blinded by the sun when you are outside?
How to make coffee from instant coffee powder?
To save money and use a non toxic cleaner to clean cupboards, counters, and sinks,
To saute bacon until it is lightly browned, you can
how do you widen something?
How do you know which side of the wood is the top?
To recharge the battery of your vehicle,
how do you put a case on a macbook?
How to make Chocolate Three Musketeers Bar Ice Cream at home.
How to clean up your neighborhood.
What grain of sandpaper should I use when I want to remove rough surfaces on wood?
How to raise the audio volume on Windows 10
how do you contaminate a cut?
When done folding the bill into a tiny rectangle, how can somebody make sure it's very smooth and even?
How to irrigate your sinuses
How do you make your own baking liners for use in muffin or cupcake pans?
napkin
Secure sippy cup in shopping cart.
Sign up for free online trials without getting spam.
How to I prepare the cherries before mixing the ingredients for the jam ?
how to clean inside a fridge
To make some extra money while you're in college,
jar
How do you give the railroad spike a shape?
To crush mints into a sugar-like consistency.
Make coffee without regular tools.
To make a paper airplane.
How to Make Easy Homemade Butter
How to make the eyes and mouth for an Aku Aku mask from Crash Bandicoot.
Making slime
To iron hard to reach areas on clothing.
How can you grow an avocado from a pit.
How to paint walls
How to add a light bulb to an empty socket
To keep your children from spreading a mess when they're eating,
how do you douche a house?
How can I get a bedroom door open that is locked?
How to make an Arkansas Mudpie
Making a better study space
t-shirt
What supplies are needed to make homemade toothpaste?
To punch a hole in a piece of leather with a hammer punch.
water bottle
When should you transfer seedlings out of their germination bed in a timely manner?
how do you get rid of inflamation?
How do I remove spent thermal paste from computer components when repairing them?
How To Prepare Apples to Make Easy Apple Roses
How should you clean a bathtub?
how do you use measuring tape?
To clean keyboard keys,
to maintain a cast iron pan that is not used often
When to attach the hinges for a pirate treasure chest?
how to make tuxedo olives
When to use wall studs for hanging objects from the wall.
To enlarge a hole you've cut in a sock, you can
how do you tip toe?
What are good places to look for discarded shelves for a DIY hanging shelf?
How to decorate card for Valentine's Day.
saute shrimp
How do you braid cornrows?
how do you serenade someone?
How to dig a hole
Where to buy bead materials.
how do you hitchhike?
To keep flowers alive for longer
Remove mildew stains from plastic garden furniture.
How do you use a clean plastic 2 liter pop bottle as a foot muscle roller?
how do you give someone a present?
How to Make Crushed Ice
Sanitize trash bin.
filter
To keep your soccer shoes smelling very fresh.
What do I need to make a colorful pencil box out of recycled pencils?
How do you clean up an orange juice spill?
glasses
paint
How to you slice cheese?
Wrap a burrito to be eaten.
How to repair yellow grass in heat of summer
What can I use to make a Christmas CD wreath?
To cut angles out of a block of wood, you can
clothes pin
To heat a grilled cheese without burning it,
How to do you make ice cream in a jar?
make mango lime dressing
television
To zip-up your coat,
Create multiple cleaning rags.
To prevent sawdust around a scroll saw
how to make coconut nog
pin
How should I get the exact measurement on my wood
How to tie gift bow.
How do I clean the front door of my house?
How can I keep my ceiling fan cooling me during the summer?
How do you connect two wire leads
Removing spray paint from fabric
Take off crayon marks from coffee table.
how do you use a crib?
To rescue an engagement ring that's been lost down a drain,
chip clip
To protect your head when welding.
To plan the route of a road trip,
Use container for sharp small items.
Where can you get a record for your DIY project?
To quicken the time it takes shellac flakes to dissolve in solution.
To prepare peppers to be used in a recipe, you should
how do you use a fry pod?
Pursuing Your Goals with Persistence
pickaxe
Give privacy in a small bedroom.
How many legs does a table have
projector
nail
How to grind coffee beans withou a grinder or blender?
To use a screwdriver to disassemble a Nintendo 64 controller.
How can I keep from hammering my fingers when I start nailing a nail?
Learn how to prepare strawberries for a candy coating.
How can I tell when to take cookies out of the oven?
How do I design a 3D printed ring?
Pour concrete table.
Create toy mailbox for toddlers.
To colour thread for thread painting
How to stop nail polish lids from drying shut?
how to make greek seasoning
How to make Pluot syrup at home.
Make a donut batter
To prevent injuries from metal bars,
To heat up a plate of food in the microwave oven for 50 seconds
Empty a glass of water.
handkerchief
How do you use two part epoxy?
How to get to the store.
How do you use a Ziploc bag to pipe frosting?
To secure a smaller pipe inside a larger pipe,
What safety precautions do I need to take when making a DIY rug?
How can you get your zipper to stay up and in place?
how to effectively remove dirt from car carpets
How do you get a first down in football?
To find more interesting ways to spend your time in an exotic location,
How do I shuffle magic cards in sleeves
How do I remove the dirt from the boards ?
how to put on a shirt
Make tea light candles.
To safely store Christmas decorations for the next year,
Sketch out your design idea before starting your project.
baking sheet
How do you dribble a ball from left to right?
To deep fry chicken wings.
make coffee filter
how do you turn off the power  in your home?
Make a white sauce for pizza
To roll a joint without papers.
book
How to create a soda and candy reaction
Make an ipad stand for your kitchen.
Quickly untangle headphones.
smelter
How to pound out beef steak.
magic eraser
How can I make extra thick, perfect cookies?
To make fabric in homemade tutu stand out more.
Prevent moisture in bathroom during showers.
How to clean stubborn dirt in mugs or glasses?
Where should robbers go when they are caught
Learn to make bacon infused fire lighters.
slicer
keep plastic wrap from sticking to itself
How to Make a Foam Cube Truss Bridge
How do I exercise lightly
To destroy important documents from a political campaign.
Prevent sore muscles during exercise.
To keep a bike safe from thieves.
To install fence posts properly into the ground before building a fence
To make a lion house cherry chocolate cake,
thread
How to open the throttle on a motorcycle while it's moving.
cloth
Add vitmains to chimichurri.
how do you check your credit score?
how do you use bubble wrap?
Reuse your quilting scraps.
To make the rainbow effect of the colors of the sweetheart cake
After rolling up the filled spanish bread
bobby pin
tape
floor
When painting my bedroom, how can I make sure I don't get any on the floor?
To make a wooden cut out of an eater bunny,
how do you apply foundation?
use crutches
To make a wood table from scratch,
how to light paper matches
Stop a door hinge from squeaking
To make rainbow baking soda
how do you wear clip on earrings?
Gloves
To avoid tracking mud inside after a day playing in the rain,
Cover wound in an emergency.
how do you inititate something?
Make a footrest for baby car seat.
Make wrist guard for keyboard.
Make comic strips water-resistant for display.
To get a dog to sleep in his crate happily.
How do I refill an empty propane tank?
How long do the chops stay in the pan to cook?
To allow lavender to extract into oil, you should
To add a zesty flavor to white frosting,
How to Clean a Hydro Flask
how to get pasta stain out of a shirt.
how do you use the 'and' symbol on a keyboard?
how to clean a grill, when you can't find the brush
how to get a streak-free windshield
how do you clean jewelry?
how do you scroll through facebook on an iphone?
How To Make In-N-Out Double Double Cheeseburger Copycat
how do you display a disco ball?
Clean dirty video game controllers.
How do I mix the paste for hanging yarn ball art?
What type of cardboard should I use for the vertical frame when making easy cardboard shelves?
Make a vanity tray.
Clean a golf club.
how do you use a water squirter?
What is a good way to eat cookies if you don't have a glass for milk?
How to peel a boiled egg.
To twist pretzel dough into the proper shape,
To watch youtube at 4k.
Keep damp glued construction paper from curling while drying.
Prevent bee infestation.
How to remove belts or embellishments from a pair of boots
How do you prepare and bake a turkey?
When making homemade royal icing, how do you get the lumps out while boiling?
To clean a flat screen TV screen
pen
how do you suck up dirt from the floor?
To help prevent a paint smell from filling the room when painting,
how do you  make an alarm go another round?
nontoxic way to get rid of mold and mildew in house plants.
Make a costume for Halloween.
How to attach wings to your cardboard pony.
to make homemade playdough
To make your whole house smell good during parties,
To lay out your book,
How do I apply toothpaste to my toothbrush?
Store leftover fresh herbs.
how do you check if someone is alive?
can
To make brush and makeup slots in a sushi mat makeup holder
How do you pour soup from a ladle to serve it?
How to make your sinks and tubs shiny.
hardware
how do you hike up a mountain?
How do I stick vinyl wall art on a wall?
What ingredients do you need to make homemade edible Christmas Coals?
how do you exspunge something?
can
how to make a stuffed apple
how do you crowd something?
how do you show your car is stopped?
How would a person cut out a shape that they do you want a piece of plywood?
Add vegetables to egg white omelet.
How to make a simple wick for a homemade lighter?
plastic
How to draw a circle on a piece of wood in order to make a pizza peeler.
How to install a harddrive for use?
Remove odor from tupper ware.
how do you show someone talking in a sentence?
Keep plastic bag liners secure in trash bin.
how to make a stitch straight without using a hoop when repairing clothes
To become better in your social and business life,
Disinfect dish sponge.
Combine ingredients for the cookies.
nail polish
how do you wear a pin?
How to install new mountain bike brake pads
how do you disect something?
To make a nicer smile when smiling,
To cut a pizza without a pizza cutter.
How to put out a grease fire?
Take off tea stain from mug.
ladle
zuchini linguine
how to kill weeds
how do you show you're yelling through text?
How to know if someone has a fever?
Make massage oil from coconut oil
How to Apply Sugar to make Candied Violets
Is there an easy way to make a sparkly pendant?
To keep clothing fresh and dry
ink
Remove pieces of stuck meat.
To become employed as a Disney movie character actor,
How to jump start a car
How long should I proof bread rolls in the oven?
How can you make a paper look longer?
Getting help for your move
To transfer ice cream onto a tortilla, you can
How do you measure liquid medication?
to find the hole in your tire
Protect your tools from rusting.
To more easily figure out meal plans at home,
How do you make homemade cranberry sauce?
bucket
How do I clean my floor tiles?
matches
Prevent crumbles when cutting cake.
How to Identify Ich or Ick (Ichthyophthirius Multifilis) in Freshwater Fish
How can I mark on lacy fabric in order to cut it to size?
how to cut through shower grime
strainer
How to clean window sills and sliding glass door tracks.
How can you get a rough estimate of how long an inch is?
To make a sprinkler out of a water bottle,
how do you keep bread from sticking to a pan?
Boost your concentration.
Increase compost food for worms.
How do you start clearing a clogged drain?
How to remove stains from a mattress.
How can you quickly lower your body temperature?
Where should my firewood be stacked?
Connecting the cut pieces to build the boat.
What is a good alternative to remove waterproof eye makeup?
What are some important things to put in your backpack on a camping trip?
Once the knot is tied, how do you seal it?
Make night markers.
What are the ingredients to make homemade glass cleaner?
How can I make it easier to clean a pot with stuff stuck to it?
To open a bottle of soda,
To get gum off of your shoe.
To protect your feet while walking outdoors,
How can I relieve symptoms of Menopause?
how do you cradle a baby?
how do you keep lasagna from sticking on a pan?
To make it so that glitter will stick to a surface, you can
how do you look at your friends on facebook
how to saute like a pro
Prevent sweat stains.
How to calm a child
How to put up a shelf.
how to find th emilky way
To test the LED strip,
Make a watering can.
Listen to soothing sounds before bed.
Make a simple desert.
To make feet for an indoor / outdoor table.
How would one use a hot glue gun?
To clean up your computer keyboard,
Remove the feathers from a chicken.
Increase power of dish washing powder.
How do I apply joint compound when making a magnetic drywall?
key
how top open a wine bottle
To light a candle with hard-to-reach wicks in a pinch,
how ot mix 2 cycle gas
Treat a nosebleed.
To avoid rusting a metal project, you can
How can I avoid tears when cutting onions?
Snow pants
To prepare the halloumi cheese to make into fries.
How to protect image on stone after transferring.
What can you eat that is a zero carb. snack?
How to make an egg salad.
Make my own cajun seasoning
Avoid burning sugar from sauce when grilling.
In order to grill artichokes,
how do i clean a window air conditioner?
To remove a nail with a hammer.
How do I season ground meat when making meat sauce?
To determine whether or not a baby is dehydrated,
Proper way to accept an award
How do I keep up with writing in a journal
how do you chug a drink?
How to install an LED light pattern on to a sweatshirt?
How to bake your mugs?
What kind of tape should I use on the written labels for notebook dividers?
shirt
scale
How to remove nails from wood scraps.
Addressing Elimination Problems in cats
How to protect raw metal edges from rust
Time frame to chill Pistachio Truffle in the freezer.
Make outdoor noise amplifier.
How to add more fun to Bottles of Water for Light Box Magic Science Experiment for Kids
napkins
how do you use a pillow?
What is something good to snack on if I have nicotine withdrawl?
how do you shout at someone?
To stop yourself from getting glitter everywhere while making a craft,
Create a water slide.
What materials do I need to build a screened in porch?
To fill a syringe with fluid,
making a treasure map
Make a hard boiled eggs
How do you photograph snowflakes?
How can I make durable sandpaper?
How to make a pair of homemade ear plugs.
Make a snowball
To protect part of an area from being painted, you can
how do you naked someone?
Remove egg shells easily.
how to make a spicy roast beef and brie sandwich
How do I get the hood of my car to shine?
how do you check if a tire is full?
Find free glass for building projects.
How do you cook bacon that is covered with sugar for Candied Bacon.
axe
Cut an uncooperative dog's toenails.
Open apple cider bottle that is stuck
strobe light
how to remove garlic odors on hands
how to get a better rise on yeast products?
power drill
Open SIM card tray.
When should you add lettuce or cabbage to a fajita?
lighter
aquarium plants
How do you know when it is time to move out?
How do I protect flammable surroundings when soldering a pipe for plumbing projets?
Get vitamins before bed without eating.
To preserve Hammered Leaf and Flower Prints.
To make a turkey and cheese sandwich,
To make it easier for a barrel to stay level once you fill it with soil
To prevent dry, chewy crust when microwaving pizza leftovers,
how to roast breadcrumbs
sieve
Roast multiple hot dogs at once.
Grow a vine in sandy, dry soil and drought conditions.
How to Make Easy Yard Dice
how do you wrap something?
To inspire learning when opening a computer,
How do I mark the edges when making a sunroom addition to a house?
To create a stool with a laser cutter that doesn't require glue or tools.
How often should gauge blocks be calibrated?
Shower in the woods.
lighter
Solving a jigsaw puzzle that is all one color.
To plant tomato plants,
Defrost meat quickly.
Make paper snowflakes to decorate you room with.
To check to see if you are being cat-fished on a dating site,
To prepare a pot for popcorn, you can
To wash all of the corners of a baby bottle,
cabinet
Make caterpillars from fruit
dirty apartment
How do I know if a credit card is a Visa or a Mastercard account?
hose
how do you get 'strapped'?
To create a chevron pattern on wooden dining table.
how do you size your finger?
how do you use medication?
How to cut wood to Jenga wood size.
How many drops of food coloring should you use to make tye dye ice?
What is the best way to store ice cream?
ziplock bag
someone's shoulders
To keep from biting your nails,
To open a plastic trash bag
How to Make Clog Word Boots with a Wheel in the Heel out of Recycled Wood Pallets
What can I use to make a shoe insert?
How can I remove hot glue from fabrics or the surface of a decoration?
To avoid being embarrassed when buying something
To Get customers for your car wash.
To attach a piece of leather permanently together, you can
To waste time at work and have fun while doing it,
To prevent the frozen vegetable pieces from sticking together,
What 5 ingredients will I need to make an all natural lip gloss at home?
How to cut out sewing pattern from fabric.
How to wash soft baby toys
To help get rid of a headache,
To keep wires securely glued together when making a choker out of an old computer power supply, what can I do?
How to shoot an arrow
homemade sugar cookies
To tighten up a screw
mug
How can I get my nose bleed to stop bleeding?
How can you soothe a sore throat?
How do you staple papers together?
how do you wrap gifts?
To properly cook the doggy cookie dough until done
Avoid throwing up.
fingernails
How do you clean leather?
To start a car.
To get rid of ads when playing games
Cheese dough
how to make bunny ears
how do you eat a burrito?
If you have something stuck in your eye,
To make a wooden iPhone case.
An axe
How to turn normal yogurt into greek yogurt?
Make glitter wine glasses.
To help determine which diet changes you need,
how do you serenade someone?
To mix ingredients to make cookies, you can
how to dye food black
How do you connect a PS4 to a TV?
Where should I hide Easter eggs for the hunt
how do you protect a camera screen?
blade
Make a phone holder on the plane.
To chill dough to use in a recipe, you can
how to dissolve gall stones
how do you callback an unknown number?
How to make Raspberry Pine nut fudge at home.
To attach a buckle to a strip of leather, you can
how to make sesame seed candy
water
To help a dog come and go through the house when needing to go potty,
How do you warm up a cold honeybee inside?
How do you make a pattern for a sun hood?
How to prepare dye to tie dying.
Make wind guard for candle.
index card
axe
What do you need to make a ziptie lampshade?
To clean out the seeds from a squash
How to make Chips Ahoy chocolate Chocolate chip cookie Ice Cream at home.
How to make dulce de leche in an Instant Pot
How to sauteed asparagus in garlic.
Blender
How can you make your extension or power cords into a work of art?
How to make a vintage coffee table easily?
How to make a pup tent out of a poncho?
How to cut wooden stakes.
How to enjoy eating a mug cake.
How can I keep weeds out of a garden?
How do I seal the Steam-A-Seam Pattern onto my pillowcase when making a no-sew decorative pillow?
How to attain a library card?
How do you make your bed?
How can you color a shape onto paper?
How do you put a drawer back in a dresser?
How to paint clouds in acrylic
how to avoid carrying a huge roll of duct tape when camping
How to keep your hair out of your face without a hair tie?
How do you remove cat hair from a keyboard?
To scare birds away from your vehicle or yard space,
To repair the heel of a shoe, you can
For kids who can't help but have an awkward grip on their writing utensils
How to survive in the wild.
To test the oven temp prior to cooking your corn break
How can I make a mummy costume?
Hold keys on light switch.
To prevent foot odor,
Loosen a tangled chain.
How to add pine cones to the inside of a mason jar.
Clean an oven without chemicals
How to reduce water usage quickly and easily?
watering can
chopsticks
When making a crust for a pie out of cookie crumbles how do you get it to take shape and stay in place?
How to secure rolls easily.
How to blend chickpeas
How do you defrost a freezer?
how do you clean wax off of a counter?
In texting, what does so s and c mean?
How can I make a cool antique looking lamp shade?
Store items in hotel room without nightstand.
how do you jump?
To compose a mail in gmail
Prevent wrinkles during laundry.
To obtain a longer section of embroidery floss from seperate sections, you can
how to use weed whacker
paper clip
Make cinnamon sugar for toast.
Easy lemonade from Lemon juice.
how do you open a package that's taped?
To protect wood and make it shine, you can
Escape a dog bite.
Decorate and paint wooden clothespins
how do you score 0 points in bowling?
How can you use a plastic bag as a cold compress?
how to rid your house from like onions, garlic, etc
To make instant oatmeal in the microwave,
how do you cut the crease on your eyeshadow.?
Make toast.
How to make Apricot Cobbler at home.
table
To drill a hole in plexiglass without cracking it
How to store lego pieces?
how to clean a toaster?
To decorate a cake easily without much frosting skills,
To attach wooden posts permanently into the ground, you can
To attach PVC pipes for cat food dispenser to the wall.
fire
needle
To easily combine flour and salt, you can
To obtain curved planks to be used to make a sloped roof, you can
To avoid being pursued by thieves while travelling,
To cut a piece of paracord
To ask somebody's name a second time without seeming rude,
How to get Images for almost anything.
Prevent stinky feet on hot days.
plate
One seeks to re-purpose some pottery.
How do I make a worm bin stronger when putting together the trim?
chair
For a durable picture hook
To coil copper tubing like a spring
To clean up your spray painted lines on stenciled mason jar.
To protect your skin from sun damage,
Remove a jammed jar lid.
How to keep a toddler's toys organized
Cut out fabric squares.
how do you light a house at night?
how to sort beans?
To attract fruit flies, you can
how to make a chocolate cake topper
Clean kitchen drain.
How to Cook Easy Flatbreads
plastic cup
To draw a bath.
How can I dispose bacon grease?
To laser cut wooden sheet to use in projects.
To make a revealing Halloween costume more appropriate,
binder clip
To cut a pallet at specific lengths and angles, you can
What can I use to plant a small herb garden?
How do you make a cookie crispier when baking cookies?
To use a seam ripper to remove stitches from fabric.
Treat itchy throat.
How to make a worn leather jacket appear new?
How do I store spices in a tiny kitchen cabinet?
What is the best way to boil asparagus?
How can I make a cool shelf on the wall?
To promote the growth of a new plant,
How do you make lip gloss?
To protect your luggage from bedbugs at hotels.
To open an SNES cartridge.
t-shirt
To prepare a pressure cooker for steaming, you can
How do I make my pasta more flavorful when cooking?
Make a tiny secret compartment.
To attach small pieces of wire to a circuit border, you can
drill
broom
How to create 2D architectural model.
How to smooth out a piece of foil?
lysol wipe
How do you drain a tuna can?
how to make chili chocolate toast
how do you make pigs in a blanket?
How can I make glue easier to spread?
How do you choose the correct fabric for a Photography Backdrop?
Repair hole in screen window.
vase
To keep a wooden frame square as you screw it together, you can
What do I cut onions with?
piece of wood
Prevent overflow in boiling pot.
How to emboss a piece of leather.
To adjust a child's pair of pants if they're too skinny,
roll of wrapping paper
How to clean a knife
How can you redo a messed up voicemail?
how to keep more of your heat from escaping
how to move?
How can I make Beeswax candles at home?
what is the easiest way to grate soft cheese?
How long should you let your yarn sit in a dye pot when doing a natural color with wildflowers?
wipes
Where can I find a chameleon
Recycle forks in plant nurseries
Organize your dresser.
To charge a phone without a charger when staying at a hotel,
how do you comment on something?
How to darken water colors on a painting?
How do I fry potatoes
To make sure that water is fresh to drink when camping.
What to use to regulate temperature in a smoker.
cats
To make a baby as safe as possible while they're asleep,
How to make lettered stencils for art projects.
How can you stop procrastinating?
how do you fix a light that went out on your car?
To make hot chocolate more fun for kids,
floor
To cure bad breath
To sanitize a used sponge,
Ice
To make homemade salt olive oil exfoliating lotion.
how to relieve stress naturally
how do you embody something?
how do you sharpen something?
Repair broken flip flop strap.
cheese cloth
To clean off the screen of your android phone.
How do I paint a pinecone Christmas tree?
To quickly assemble a wooden box, you can
To draw even lines on a sheet of polystrene, you can
how do you make fries?
Cook pasta.
How to clean out a shaker bottle that's dirty?
To unclog a sink that wont unclog no matter what,
crowbar
How to make frosting
To fold the shirt,
How to make Apple Cranberry syrup at home.
How to smooth over old skateboard wheels?
trash bag
Prevent coffee spill.
To turn up the volume on the radio
how to make a camping toilet
make fudge swirl
How to choose muskmelon.
how do you squish something?
How to avoid losing your gloves when working outside?
How to quickly ripen an avocado?
To get children to eat more colorful vegetables.
fist
To frost the entire sweetheart cake
steel
how to make creamy caper-herb dressing
How to make the handle for your re-curve bow?
To freeze lasagna
Learn what type of bags are used to make an insulated earthbag house.
how do you crawl?
How do you prepare citrus for Citrus Wedges?
To create carrot zest, you can
TO provide nutrients to a garden plant,
Make a phrase on the wall.
how do you sock someone?
To activate siri on your iPhone,
To prep chicken for chicken and dumplings.
To grow tomatoes from seed,
When frying dough, to prevent it from bloating up from the oil
how do you win a basketball game?
Make sure most of popcorn kernels pop.
How can I keep my home cool during the hot summer?
metal wheel
Make a face mask to avoid dust and smoke.
Make layered pillowcase.
How to quickly cool melted chocolate?
Make bag ice cooler.
forklift
How to add dimension to cardboard shield.
how to use your turn signal on a car
Freshen up a room.
When rinsing dye off of fabric, to retain the most color, you can
To make a hand basket water proof.
What is a low tech way to keep mosquitoes from my space?
how to tap a maple tree
how to remove stains from teeth at home
To prevent cool whip from sticking to a pan while storing it, you can
Organize hammer nails.
To create a table.
How can I remove stickers from furniture?
Create half moon nail polish design.
To store ice cream to be eaten later, you can
make your hat stay put
how to handwash dishes
make caramel cupcakes
to make dairy free ice cream.
Keep pet cages clean.
Make a tortuga
To conserve water,
How to make seedless blackberry syrup at home.
to grate soap for laundry detergent.
What is the last step to tying a Eldredge knot.
window
how do you search for a specific move on netflix?
how do you win at hungry hungry hippos?
How to attach to coin as a pendant to a chain?
What is the most nutritious food for a newborn baby?
ceilings
How do you coat strips of Bacon in brown sugar for Candied Bacon.
How to make an elevator go to your floor without making any stops on the way?
To cool down hot chocolate faster,
How to prevent bathroom mirror from fogging up.
computer
How to make bite-sized smores right in your kitchen.
fire
How to put the Cyclone dust collector together?
To bring wooden boards to an equal thickness, you can
How do I make a cosplay wig look like my favorite character?
How to wash a plate
hatchet
To dissolve chemical crystals in a chemical solution.
To make your own glue,
To permanently attach leads to a circuit board, you can
To allow the rainbow bread to rise for a second time
To hammer the quarter's rim,
To temporarily increase counter space in a small kitchen,
How do you make eggplant less bitter?
To remove mud easily from a car tyre.
rubber bands
How can I get the most out of my cottage cheese and sour cream and make them last longer?
How to shave a cat at home?
wite-out
What ingredients are needed to make a rhubarb pie?
Light a hard to reach candle wick.
How to draw lines on milk jug to cut.
how do you call an ambulence?
Homemade simple syrup for cocktails,
Keep wrenches organized.
How can I prep gifts in advance
how do I dice a tomato?
Prevent your kids from always using new cups and leaving the old ones lying around the house.
How to dye Easter eggs
How do I get scuffs out of my leather black boots?
make chair cover for rain
What materials would I need in order to make the water filter?
To waterproof shoes with materials from the home,
tape
To use the lined square muffin pan as a mold for molten chocolate.
How to turn granulated sugar into powdered sugar at home?
To mount corrugated plastic to a ceiling, you can
To make gum drops without gelatin.
how do you blow dry your hair?
How can you remove paint without a sander?
how to make an avocado-egg pita
Make a key holder.
To find the center of the round piece,
How do I cut the baked puff pastry rectangles when making a strawberry napoleon
To clean the keyboard that comes with a surface.
how do you get rid of an ear infection>?
To attach uneven pieces of plywood, you can use
What is the quickest way to make peanut butter cookie
How to scramble eggs.
How to make a simple syrup?
To make a panel from slats of wood.
To staple papers together.
how do you crop a picture?
how do you spit?
To store noodles after making them, you can
To roll cake and frosting mixture into a ball to make cake pops.
how do you catch a ball?
How do you dye leather with a gel dye?
how do you close a purse?
how ot melt crayons
Keep birds away from garden plants.
make a drink called paid vacation
For a meeting or job interview over Skype
file
Coat racks
bin
Determine a potato is fully cooked.
One seeks to have portable toothpaste.
box cutter
One wants to make a sweet using chocolate and peanut butter.
To chill a bottle of water when out in the wilderness,
What ingredients do you need to make tye dye ice?
How can you clean up nail polish that has spilled?
Fit multiple tops on one large hanger.
Teach the dog to stop going potty on the carpet.
How can I pretreat stained clothing before throwing it in the washer?
What are some common spice ingredients for chicken curry?
To seal a box,
How can I preserve dried flowers?
To get the first Xbox console.
To improve the quality of an essay,
credit card
To remove the saltiness of over salted meat,
To organize loose change.
After the electrolysis, how do you remove the rust from the metal?
how do you 'paint a pretty picture'
What should you do if approached by a Wolf in the wild?
Fire smoke
What can I use to cover some acne on my face before going out?
Making the whipped cream
What ingredients do you need to make Kool-Aid pickles?
How do you make plant pots to germinate seedlings from Solo cups?
How to sharpen a pencil
How do you calm down when you are panicked?
How do you remove dust from a room fan?
scale
to bend plywood into a permanent shape
How to use old chips?
What kind of toys make great stocking stuffers?
Make foil pan.
How to boil the water for your beer?
How can I keep from overheating my home in summer?
To make a neatly arranged BLT sandwich,
How to store left over marinara sauce?
Is there anything else I can use to make pizza dough?
root
Blender
To bake a cake,
To apply grease paint to a prosthetic werewolf mask.
How to install gutters.
How to Recognize Spam E-Mail
Identify when someone wants to leave a conversation.
What can I use to hold ornaments from my tree in a pinch?
winches
How long should I smoke a pork butt?
how to properly use salt for seasoning.
How do you mix the liquids for a white sangria?
how do you spoil a surprise?
Make a glass wind chime.
how do you place a fitted sheet on a bed?
Out in the woods and you cut yourself
easily remove egg shells from hard boiled eggs
How to decorate for Easter
how to start a conversation
How can I make green frosting?
To help a mixture solidify into a jello, you can
To remove the bad odor from gym shoes,
To easily smoke a hot dog,
To steal second base.
how to make maple chai
how do you stop someone from overdosing?
How can I organize my closet and figure out what to get rid of in there?
when toss a salad with dressing
how do you smoke?
What can I use to get water out of a 5 gallon bucket?
How to produce chicken pate from chicken livers?
Peel Paper Skin From Ginger
How to tie knot in the end of yarn.
butcher knife
To avoid damaging your hair with excessive heat,
How can I prevent a snag in nylons from getting larger?
Prevent finger prints on kitchen faucet.
Is it possible for someone to be allergic to tonic water?
To save money when you shop
ladle
What can I use instead of breadcrumbs?
To make an All-American grilled cheese
Create a wood conveyor.
How to cool water in a water bottle
How do you switch seasons on a netflix series?
How to raise tadpoles.
To unscrew a flat head screw without a screw driver.
How to soothe a bee sting?
Make a lint roller.
How do I delete a google account from my phone?
How do I start making the meringue when making pavlova cookies?
How do you mix resin properly?
Make your own dog food.
Avoid losing gas cap.
To prevent lip stick from getting on teeth,
Cutting an Ingrown Toenail
How to steam vegetables in the microwave?
to stop children from boredom on a  long car trip
To prepare the pan for the shepads piem
To cook meat outside without producing smoke while cooking,
plastic wrap
To line up and cut glass bottles in half,
how do you wash your hair?
To create holes in the ground for the posts that will be the cabin foundation.
How to bake a potato.
If you have poor quality soil, what can you do to help your plants grow?
Treat acne bumps.
To make paint texture on wood look older.
Make a terrarium.
To prevent your pet from spreading hair around the entire house,
mixer
When making your own lemon soap, how can you ensure that the lemon oil is heated to 130 degrees?
What ingredients do I need to make Bacon wrapped Jalapeños?
mop
If I'm turning part of my wood fence into a gate, which fence boards should I pry off?
how do you stone someone?
Finishing the belt
Remove spicy taste from mouth.
coat hanger
How can I make popsicles for dogs?
where is the Pavo constellation located
To keep swimming goggles from fogging up.
How do you make laundry soap?
How do you candy a violet?
Remove hair dye from shirt collar.
How to Make an Ultraviolet Torch
Prevent falling books from shelf.
How to make a cooking fire in the yard without a grill?
To induce lucid dreaming while sleeping,
toothbrushes
Whiten your teeth with a natural item
how to treat ring around the collar
To keep a razor blade used for shaving fresh,
To keep deer out of your garden,
how to make gingerbread pops
How to stuff toilet paper cores with soil.
wash cloth
How to fill soda bottle to make vortex.
What would you use to make rafters more sturdy?
What is a good way to help your piercing heal?
What do you need to replace a battery?
To help your brain retain information when studying,
What if I want to kill myself and am afraid to speak to someone on the suicide hotline?
Increase focus for an exam.
How can I get my socks cleaner?
how do you like a post on facebook?
How do you make paper mache?
To form dough back together that cracks when rolling out.
Make guitar picks.
How can I get my clothes to dry faster in the dryer?
ice cream scoop
What types of things can be used to make a unique, re-purposed lamp?
To put on a button down shirt,
To protect a chicken coop from predators, you can
How to form a solid brace from paper?
To help firm up the donut cake after frosting
To add scent to homemade body scrub.
To level a cake after it comes out of the oven.
Get rid of hiccups.
How can I add pockets to my T-shirt Vest?
How can I make Lemon scented Candles at home?
how do you get more leg room in the front seat of a car?
How to clean your computer screen.
How do I pick up my dog's poop from the yard?
Make a sticky, foamy mess from a two liter of diet soda.
To affix a photo to foam board,
To chop an onion into small, even pieces, you can
How can you remember the I before e except for rule?
How to remove canvas from a picture frame.
flour
how to enhance the flavor of off-season strawberries?
Make a braid dog toy.
Keep trash bag secured to bin.
To easily clean a lamp shade,
To get the meat a nice,even crust while it is cooking.
Sanitize power tools.
How can you neutralize very spicy food and stop the pain?
to paint a pot wrinkly.
To protect your fingers when cooking, you can
How to best draw the eyelashes in a pencil drawing?
sift flour into the bowl.
How to Become a Professional Organizer
Bake a holiday Cranberry/apple cobbler at home.
How to Remove Burn Marks on Wood
pen
How do you to make a creamy milk shake in five minutes?
How to tell if someone likes you.
How can I make a top for a waterskin canteen?
How do you organize your pantry?
How to remove dust from fan.
how to use duct tape to cover furniture leg bottoms to avoid scratching the floor
Prevent dark colored clothes from fading.
use a neti pot
How to trace legs.
When can I see clouds in the sky
To final step to prepare the piece of wood to be a belt buckle.
Avoid straining neck during sit ups.
Mixing ingreatiants
What is a clever way to clean the microwave?
How to make Cinnamon roll Peach Cobbler in your own kitchen.
What is an easy way to find and retrieve metal objects lost in tall grass?
how do you use a nintendo switch on a tv?
To prevent cables from being entangled when in storage,
grill
machete
To paint lips on a model, you can
To keep the kids reasonably quiet
To remove dried paint from a paintbrush.
What kind of footwear would be suited for a job interview?
What kind of bottle would be a good type to use to make a bottle cannon?
vinegar
Making a chain
To allow the tortilla dough to rest
How do you lasercut plywood coasters?
how do you connect a phone to wireless headphones?
how do you catch someone in a lie?
To prevent your vehicle from getting spotty after a rain storm,
How to sand your base?
how do I clean a window with vinegar?
release concrete from a mould
How do I keep little kids from locking themselves into the bathroom?
To use a salt shaker.
Keep keys from getting lost.
What can I do with Ritz crackers and Rolo's to make a fast treat?
Make a skateboard holder
How to give someone a neck massage?
how do I make a peanut lime dressing?
Make a cereal necklace.
To prevent metal from rusting, you can
To attach the Roman Blind to the wall so it can easily be taken down.
how to bake a souffle
how to organize my closet
Make sheets of pasta in pasta machine.
How do I make a crust for an arkansas mudpie?
How to remove toilet bowl stains?
How do you make a juicer out of a can to juice berries with?
To ensure that the base of a leather shoe will fit, you can
How to prevent pasta from clumping while cooking in a pot?
How to Make Chocolate and Peanut butter Ice cream at home without an Ice Cream freezer.
how to prevent limp celery
To protect your eyes from sunlight,
To preserve your wood cutting board and extend it's life.
To pour concrete mix into the mold to be used as a base for a bench.
To keep wiring unobtrusive on a piece of lighted cardboard art.
To joint sections of wood together, you can
To keep hands dry when wearing gloves during a motorcycle ride,
futon
How to baby proof a room.
how do you start a game of baseball?
Remove tomato stain from clothes.
To start Bluetooth on your android phone.
To cook with spicy peppers without burning your hand's skin,
how do you change the color of a wall?
use a lemon to clean the microwave
How do you keep a necklace attached around your neck?
Prepare brown sugar and cinnamon spread.
Soothe muscle soreness after exercising.
One seeks to decorate their umbrella for Halloween.
how do I make chocolate crinkles?
How do you pop a balloon?
cardboard box
how to get wax out of molds after it cools
how to make black bean corn salad
how do you throw away needles?
To make your luggage as light as possible for a trip,
Maximize toothpaste use.
To prevent body odor,
person's lap
How do I melt chocolate?
To beat the eggs for the funfetti pancake batter
To ensure the Dutch Oven reaches an optimum heat of 375 degrees in order to cook the food properly.
Make a secret hiding compartment in living room.
how to mop without a bucket
smoker
Make customers nicer to cashiers.
how to tie the first knot.
Make a car trash can.
washcloth
how do you open up a package from amazon?
how do you turn the volume down on something casting off your iphone?
Remove the plastic bumpers from a shopping cart.
To add flavor to popcorn, you can
How do you store leftovers?
Plant a tulip
how do you cook crab legs?
How to make a simple birthday card.
How should I clean and prepare a head of cabbage for a dinner recipe?
To attach velcro to the inside of a hoodie, you can
To allow wood to have a natural distressed look, you can
To open a beer can without messing up a finger or fingernail.
how do you read a book
How to make bean dip.
how to soften meat
getting the shapes
how do you fill up a pool in the yard?
How to infuse flavor into whiskey?
To uncork a wine bottle without a corkscrew.
duct tape
plug
How do you attach a charm to the center of a dream catcher?
socks
Drink a liquid to remove allergies.
how do you place dishes to dry in a dish drainer?
To keep drinks from getting watered down.
To salt food to taste
Avoid falling asleep.
make coffee without machine
how to repel horseflies
To put on a watch.
how to make banana pancakes
How do you make a shirt a tank top?
MGM and other studios
How do you make a lemon juice concentrate?
Making a fun notebook using floppy disks.
how do you keep your hair from falling on your face?
fingernail
What prepped work is required to cook the chicken.
to make mashed potatoes
How to prevent electric shocks while repairing the electrical wiring in your house?
How to prevent the bracelet from getting wet while washing hands?
How to make bone broth.
Bake pumpkin seeds to make a snack.
how do you see your bestfriends on snapchat?
Paint and stain your plane.
To make a quick chicken salad,
how do you prime your eyelide for makeup?
how to start a fire with a grate
One seeks to make a DIY uncontaminated glove box.
To win at battleship,
What ingredients are needed to make peppermint and lavender foot soak?
how do you rebuttle something?
To fry potatoes in a pot of peanut oil, you can
how do you keep from being thrown out of the vehicle if you crash?
coffee filter
vase
To help a carved pumpkin last longer,
To make your lights more energy efficient,
How can I keep cats out of my garden?
Prevent razor burn on legs.
The main use of a clamp
how to peel kiwi
How do I pop the balloons when making yarn ball art?
hands
When making a miniature polymer birthday cake, how do I attach the cake to a wooden circle?
How to connect leads to the bluetooth device?
To protect your eyes from injury while hiking,
When making a modern planter box, how do I hold the pieces together during assembly?
Make multiple cleaning rags.
how to make chocolate chip cookie toast
how to DIY a roasting rack
To seal off the ends of paracord.
What equipment do I need to make a creamy chocolate toffee torte?
To bend a piece of copper wire to make a bracelet, you can
How to easily pack shirts in a suitcase?
how to keep a cutting board in place
Tie down climbing pants.
how do you clap your hands?
To tell if someone is lying on Instagram
Remove ice from a doorstep without salt
How do you know to break up with your girlfriend?
To make dehydrated banana chips,
How can I store and keep my toothpaste organized?
To make batter look fresher when frying Italian food,
To attach the new fabric to an office chair seat.
how to crack eggs
how do you see how much you've made in a day  on mturk?
What supplies are used to make an Eye of Sauron Bolo Tie?
How to make a green smoothie
How to make a ball for kids to play with in a pinch?
To store your shampoo and conditioner easily,
blanket
rock
Erase Sharpie writing from shipment box.
Your clothes need ironing after you unpack your suitcase, but you have no iron?
How do fix a clogged sink?
To make it easier to serve guests at a party,
How to change a fuse in a sub woofer amp.
Make a skirt from an old dress.
To build a work bench.
Treat burns with aloe vera.
Reduce anxiety of waiting times.
What can you use to make a thumb drive wearable around your neck?
How to make ice cubes
How do you prep a sharpening stone before sharpening a chef knife?
how do you use a teabag?
How to put toothpaste on a toothbrush
To avoid giving yourself a bad hangover after drinking,
To prepare dough for Pumpkin Prosciutto and Ricotta Flatbread Squares.
How do I harvest my leaf lettuce?
To make sure you don't touch roadkill when picking it up off the side of the roads.
How to hone a knifes edge
To apply a vibrant color to wood that will stick around, you can
To keep sponges and loofahs from getting loaded with bacteria.
lid
Prevent liquid waste smell in trash bin.
box cutter
drill
To provide support to tomato plants in the garden,
to make rich chicken stock.
How can you diagnose a ringworm infection?
to clean the tongue of a shoe
How to put hair in a ponytail.
What do you need to make glow-in-the-dark-bottles?
To reduce the amount of shedding your dog does,
To cool down hot cocoa quickly,
towel
To determine the proper height to make stairs for to be used for a dog to get into your bed, you can
how to make double-mint cookies
spray
To thread a needle when making a garment,
To mark a line on a piece of PVC pipe, you can
How to visit wild animals safely?
Keep table from scratching floor.
To prepare the bananas to make ice cream with familiar consistency.
how do you play go-fish
What is a good snack while watching sports?
Make a pest strip.
What color should I wear if I want to look bigger on camera?
how do you object something?
How can I neatly caulk around an area without making smudges?
How to clean your wheels?
To keep hair up out of your face,
Inflate a football
how do you fog up a bathroom?
While making homemade icing, how can I skip the sifting of the sugar?
tin foil
To cut onions without crying.
Where can I take a shower
How do I make ridges in ram horns for a costume?
How To Make In-N-Out Double Double Cheeseburger Copycat
how to keep a baby in a pack and play from getting sunburned out in the yard.
Prepare toilet water tank for removal.
How to cut the head off of plastic spoons.
Where can I find mushrooms
How to sand down the edges out of cut out ring.
To keep food cooked in foil over an open flame from burning or drying out
Preserve juices in grilled meat.
Remove fingerprints from stainless appliances
Protect garden from impact damage.
To coat a baking sheet with butter,
Escape a car submerged in water.
How long does it take to make an origami crane?
How can I make acrylic paint last on a glassware?
Remove dust from seat cushion.
counter top
How to dig up plastic fossil.
To fix a shrunken shirt.
How can I heat soup up quickly without a stove?
Save last battery life for phone.
how do you vote on a facebook poll?
How to switch from Satellite to Map view on Google Maps
washcloth
Clean a microwave easily.
how do you open an email on the yahoo app?
Keep shoes warm during winter.
how to make a raspberry-coocnut almond butter sandwich
To keep children safe and together when they're out in public,
To make use of that annoying sliver of soap from an almost used up bar
how do you clean raw chicken?
To help a dead patch of grass grow back
How do you identify ripe baneberries?
How do I prepare the biscuits for chocolate nutella tart?
lap
How to treat unfinished wood doors.
how to make a smoked salmon bagel
how to apply heat transfer vinyl
how to protect your eyes when working with power tools
Remove wrinkles from lightweight clothes.
How can I remove creases from felt?
How to Wash Marble Floors
How do you buy cheap airline tickets?
stopper
To peel a hard boiled egg.
To make ice cubes with a plastic egg carton
Make a hard cooked egg
baby wipe
To keep a phone propped up when out and about,
To secretly open a letter,
To get rid of salt stains on your shoes.
To cool down the stainless steel bowl when making whipped cream.
Make a lemon bath.
To melt wax in a saucepan,
shot glass
To preheat the oven,
How can I secure a 30 inch long piece of yarn to 2 other pieces of yarn so they can stay together and flow freely?
To cut the metal out of a tomato cage, you can
To remove cheese crisps that are stuck on the baking sheet.
toilet
How can you heal paper cut wounds?
How do you clean dishes?
How do I start a chainsaw?
To encourage your plants to grow beyond normal rates,
How do you pretreat a cat urine stain on your clothes with oxygen bleach?
How do you make a toy out of a form?
make snowman
How can I keep ants away from the house?
scrubs
how to make tangy mashed potatoes
How to make a light roux.
Prevent heartburn when eating.
To melt beeswax for making hand poured candles.
toilet tissue
how to make perfectly round fried eggs
To cut a hole in a food grade barrel for portable composter.
One seeks to avoid beverage rings on furniture.
How can I remove the knobs at the base of a lightbulb?
Prepare cream cheese for a recipe.
smoke cheese
To make mint candy dough
To cook a soup in the oven.
how do you ice something?
nails
Clear up acne.
To protect your identity online.
To flatten a metal structure, you can
Where is the best place to find a Stollet lamp?
How do I prepare a plastic shopping back to make it into fabric?
To peel a garlic clove.
How can I make sure the ice cream I buy in the store has been stored properly?
steel
Prevented watered down iced coffee.
What is the best meat replacement for vegan beef stroganoff?
How to check oil level in car
How many states are there in the US that begin with the letter M?
How should you clean an electric stand mixer's bowl?
Make a cloth snowman.
how to ignore someone?
Treat body acne.
cotton ball
rake
how do you put sunglasses on?
To make a recipe with peppers hotter, you can
how do you know what book you're reading?
Bowls 
How to make a rocker arm clothes hanger.
To make a framed chalkboard, how should I make the frame?
hair pick
rocks
How can I remove burnt food from a pan?
stapler
what can I use for a makeshift splatter shield for my stand mixer?
To play the direct squeal to Super Mario World.
to build a bookcase to hold your books.
To taper down the thickness of a surface, you can
To keep a Bed Tablet Holder in place,
how to water orchids
How to Make Cream Cheese Marshmallow Fruit Dip
matches
how to use baking soda as a deoderant
To coax food caught in a vending machine out of the machine,
How to produce a shape on a chunk of wood?
How to repair a relationship where trust was breached?
How to strain a chicken stock?
how to make colored sugar for baking?
Avoid eyeshadow under eyes.
paper towel
What are the steps to take to change the oil in your car?
Cover bright led light.
What can I make a bed or my cat out of?
How do I finish off the hat?
One wants to recycle old solders.
how to remove buildup on hair
Hide wall nail holes.
how do you put your car in a car wash?
To spread frosting evenly on top of a cake, you can
how do you bake a frozen pizza?
Clean you ceiling fans
To make homemade bacon.
Is there a faster way?
How do I make a lamp using plywood supplies?
What kind of iron should be used in the construction of a tool stand?
To completely remove sweat stains
How do you start a camp fire?
how to press flowers
How to trace garment.
Can I make a survival lamp from a can?
To clean a seat in a vehicle.
how to remove rock salt stains on pants
video tape
Attract Honey bees to your garden.
To reheat chili, you can
To make sure epoxy sticks to brass fixture.
To transfer dough from a bowl to a pan, you can
how do you advance a level in a game?
How do you clean a mirror?
How do you speed up the defrosting process of your frozen turkey?
How to find Google.
How to cool down cake batter quickly?
How do you cut a bottle to make a mini bottle shot glass?
To get around easily with multiple children,
To press flowers using a book
To make rolling the cranberry cookie cough easier to roll
D.I.Y portable honey sticks.
Remove bad smells from litter box.
how do I get mascara off?
How to remove dry leaves from your backyard?
Sit at a desk.
To get rid of red eyes at home.
how to make crispy garlic mashed potatoes
While travelling, to keep your dirty clothes from smelling bad
Make organic face scrub.
How to flatten the ends of the bike frame closed
Remove grease stains from shirt.
how to trap wasps
To glue PVC togehter
To prevent cookies from spreading too much while baking.
how do you stay safe from a pet snake?
how to make sure people understand directions?
How to Motivate Your Employees
To bake sweet potato fries to the perfect texture, you can
to remove permanent marker from white board
To earn 3 points in a football game,
chisel
Cook homemade granola evenly
How can I make money from my car without having to drive?
Attaching a hinge to a piece of wood.
To get the tuna smell out of the kitchen after making some tuna salad.
strainer
How to bake cake.
To connect two Zip Loc bags together,
How to make a compost screen.
To remove the back from a watch, you can
To find the center of a piece of metal, you can
What ingredients are needed to make Lemon and Blueberry Scones?
To apply face cream
rag
To make a gravity water pipe.
To solve the problem of a dress that's too short to wear in public,
Placing shelves against the wall
To hide a spare house key behind car license plate.
How can I erase marker on boards that won't come off?
Create a handle to carry sleeping bag.
To locate the best place to hide money.
How to make Fresh Gooseberry Syrup at home.
get a stuck screw out
hydraulic press
Open the lid on a jar that is to tight.
To measure ingredients for a recipe
ink
To attract animals at the zoo
How to change the color of the wood on a picture frame?
How to keep your brown sugar from getting hard?
what is the best way to clean a kitchen after cooking?
How do I cut off the base of the hilt of the saber ?
How to carry multiple small objects with you while travelling?
Defog a mirror quickly.
To think outside the box while writing short stories,
How to keep pants from falling down.
how to make a clean cut in leather
To make a Chakram for a Xena costume,
To cut metal cables.
To make a slam dunk in basketball,
How to keep earrings from damaging over time?
How do I prepare the cherries when making cherry cheesecake twists?
How do you beat a bowl of eggs?
how do you use the symbols on a keyboard instead of the numbers?
How do you seal the gaps after building your bookshelf for your library?
Fool your kid into cleaning their own toys.
How do I prepare the seasoning when cooking a chicken gyro?
how to keep cut flowers from wilting?
How can I grind the hazelnuts?
To draw equal lines on a paper carton, you can
How to store car tires during the winter months?
make temp tattoo
How to construct a magnetic cabinet.
how do you bound?
To attach two sections of wire together, you can
How do you make a guacamole, bacon sandwich?
Hold an old freezer door shut.
How to Put Topping on North Carolina Lemon Pie
How to make vase's sides smooth?
how do you wear a camera?
how to make sheer eyeshadow appear more colorful
To stop static from being on clothes.
To make a home remedy for diarrhea
How to make your muffins?
How to clean dirt from fingernail?
how to get rid of pet drool marks.
fist
how do you cool off on a hot day?
To make a homemade lint roller,
What do you need to do after you wash your artichokes?
Make a smoothie.
How can you stop a mosquito bite from itching?
How to correctly plant carrot seeds.
How can I soothe a sore throat?
To keep small parts together while assembling the table.
box cutter
Adhere a magnet to a measuring tape.
How do you make buttercream frosting
How do you attach small piece of plastic to the bottom of the wood box?
To open a can of soda,
hammer and nail
To make towers on a princess cake,
how do you slice something with a knife?
clay
how do you dance to the chacha slide with other people?
toilet tissue
To remove part of a brad nail that is sticking out.
how do you record a video on the snapchat app?
To melt cheese on a hamburger,
To do the butterfly stroke while swimming,
What seasonings should be added to chicken salad?
Learn a new language quickly.
how do you poison someone?
how to tell if an egg is hard boiled
To make royal icing
To aid in the ability to see the PI shape better on the PI cake,
Let oxygen in but bugs out of a container of liquid.
What are some ways to cook pizza at home?
To make the iphone stand up inside shoe box projector.
Make a bird house.
Shooting a Penalty Kick
fingernails
Shoot and kill a duck for sport.
To finely crush crackers to use in a crust, you can
How to keep a bracelet from spoiling and aging?
Commercial planes
Whats the first fold for the napkin
One wants to make a butter-based food but is Vegan.
How to prep the arrow shaft.
To scoop out the guts from a fish after cutting it, you can
What is the easiest way to dry dishes by leaving them
To make a decorative bouquet with washrags for the bathroom
telescope
Sand and make texture
how to set up a cooking workspace
Avoid mold growth on bath toys.
Inflate a basketball.
Use cheap window curtains.
To change a broken capacitor,
How to remove paint from clothing.
To remove sand from your body after being at the beach.
To prepare a pan for baking, you can
How to prevent stains on your desk from glassware?
Parachute
news
Keep car smelling clean.
How to check oil in a car.
To make it easier to sand the wooden chair before turning it into a nightstand.
how do you wear a hairtie off your hair?
To create a semi-translucent surface for a tracing box.
How do you attach a steel pipe onto a frame from a small door?
how to make campari fizz punch
baking soda
clothing
lid
For making a jar of dandelion honey, what ingredients do I need besides dandelions?
Make getting out of bed easier.
To feel more warm when outside without changing clothes,
What can I use to make my walkway look better?
how do you put pressure on something?
Create tent bug screen.
How to fertilize an indoor plant?
How can I get my office cleaned up for the year?
