<｜begin▁of▁sentence｜>Article: for about 20 years the problem of properties of short - term changes of solar activity has been considered extensively . many investigators studied the short - term periodicities of the various indices of solar activity . several periodicities were detected , but the periodicities about 155 days and from the interval of @xmath3 $ ] days ( @xmath4 $ ] years ) are mentioned most often . first of them was discovered by @xcite in the occurence rate of gamma - ray flares detected by the gamma - ray spectrometer aboard the _ solar maximum mission ( smm ) . this periodicity was confirmed for other solar flares data and for the same time period @xcite . it was also found in proton flares during solar cycles 19 and 20 @xcite , but it was not found in the solar flares data during solar cycles 22 @xcite . _    several autors confirmed above results for the daily sunspot area data . @xcite studied the sunspot data from 18741984 . she found the 155-day periodicity in data records from 31 years . this periodicity is always characteristic for one of the solar hemispheres ( the southern hemisphere for cycles 1215 and the northern hemisphere for cycles 1621 ) . moreover , it is only present during epochs of maximum activity ( in episodes of 13 years ) . similarinvestigationswerecarriedoutby + @xcite . they applied the same power spectrum method as lean , but the daily sunspot area data ( cycles 1221 ) were divided into 10 shorter time series . the periodicities were searched for the frequency interval 57115 nhz ( 100200 days ) and for each of 10 time series . the authors showed that the periodicity between 150160 days is statistically significant during all cycles from 16 to 21 . the considered peaks were remained unaltered after removing the 11-year cycle and applying the power spectrum analysis . @xcite used the wavelet technique for the daily sunspot areas between 1874 and 1993 . they determined the epochs of appearance of this periodicity and concluded that it presents around the maximum activity period in cycles 16 to 21 . moreover , the power of this periodicity started growing at cycle 19 , decreased in cycles 20 and 21 and disappered after cycle 21 . similaranalyseswerepresentedby + @xcite , but for sunspot number , solar wind plasma , interplanetary magnetic field and geomagnetic activity index @xmath5 . during 1964 - 2000 the sunspot number wavelet power of periods less than one year shows a cyclic evolution with the phase of the solar cycle.the 154-day period is prominent and its strenth is stronger around the 1982 - 1984 interval in almost all solar wind parameters . the existence of the 156-day periodicity in sunspot data were confirmed by @xcite . they considered the possible relation between the 475-day ( 1.3-year ) and 156-day periodicities . the 475-day ( 1.3-year ) periodicity was also detected in variations of the interplanetary magnetic field , geomagnetic activity helioseismic data and in the solar wind speed @xcite . @xcite concluded that the region of larger wavelet power shifts from 475-day ( 1.3-year ) period to 620-day ( 1.7-year ) period and then back to 475-day ( 1.3-year ) . the periodicities from the interval @xmath6 $ ] days ( @xmath4 $ ] years ) have been considered from 1968 . @xcite mentioned a 16.3-month ( 490-day ) periodicity in the sunspot numbers and in the geomagnetic data . @xcite analysed the occurrence rate of major flares during solar cycles 19 . they found a 18-month ( 540-day ) periodicity in flare rate of the norhern hemisphere . @xcite confirmed this result for the @xmath7 flare data for solar cycles 20 and 21 and found a peak in the power spectra near 510540 days . @xcite found a 17-month ( 510-day ) periodicity of sunspot groups and their areas from 1969 to 1986 . these authors concluded that the length of this period is variable and the reason of this periodicity is still not understood . @xcite and + @xcite obtained statistically significant peaks of power at around 158 days for daily sunspot data from 1923 - 1933 ( cycle 16 ) . in this paper the problem of the existence of this periodicity for sunspot data from cycle 16 is considered . the daily sunspot areas , the mean sunspot areas per carrington rotation , the monthly sunspot numbers and their fluctuations , which are obtained after removing the 11-year cycle are analysed . in section 2 the properties of the power spectrum methods are described . in section 3 a new approach to the problem of aliases in the power spectrum analysis is presented . in section 4 numerical results of the new method of the diagnosis of an echo - effect for sunspot area data are discussed . in section 5 the problem of the existence of the periodicity of about 155 days during the maximum activity period for sunspot data from the whole solar disk and from each solar hemisphere separately is considered . to find periodicities in a given time series the power spectrum analysis is applied . in this paper two methods are used : the fast fourier transformation algorithm with the hamming window function ( fft ) and the blackman - tukey ( bt ) power spectrum method @xcite . the bt method is used for the diagnosis of the reasons of the existence of peaks , which are obtained by the fft method . the bt method consists in the smoothing of a cosine transform of an autocorrelation function using a 3-point weighting average . such an estimator is consistent and unbiased . moreover , the peaks are uncorrelated and their sum is a variance of a considered time series . the main disadvantage of this method is a weak resolution of the periodogram points , particularly for low frequences . for example , if the autocorrelation function is evaluated for @xmath8 , then the distribution points in the time domain are : @xmath9 thus , it is obvious that this method should not be used for detecting low frequency periodicities with a fairly good resolution . however , because of an application of the autocorrelation function , the bt method can be used to verify a reality of peaks which are computed using a method giving the better resolution ( for example the fft method ) . it is valuable to remember that the power spectrum methods should be applied very carefully . the difficulties in the interpretation of significant peaks could be caused by at least four effects : a sampling of a continuos function , an echo - effect , a contribution of long - term periodicities and a random noise . first effect exists because periodicities , which are shorter than the sampling interval , may mix with longer periodicities . in result , this effect can be reduced by an decrease of the sampling interval between observations . the echo - effect occurs when there is a latent harmonic of frequency @xmath10 in the time series , giving a spectral peak at @xmath10 , and also periodic terms of frequency @xmath11 etc . this may be detected by the autocorrelation function for time series with a large variance . time series often contain long - term periodicities , that influence short - term peaks . they could rise periodogram s peaks at lower frequencies . however , it is also easy to notice the influence of the long - term periodicities on short - term peaks in the graphs of the autocorrelation functions . this effect is observed for the time series of solar activity indexes which are limited by the 11-year cycle .    to find statistically significant periodicities it is reasonable to use the autocorrelation function and the power spectrum method with a high resolution . in the case of a stationary time series they give similar results . moreover , for a stationary time series with the mean zero the fourier transform is equivalent to the cosine transform of an autocorrelation function @xcite . thus , after a comparison of a periodogram with an appropriate autocorrelation function one can detect peaks which are in the graph of the first function and do not exist in the graph of the second function . the reasons of their existence could be explained by the long - term periodicities and the echo - effect . below method enables one to detect these effects . ( solid line ) and the 95% confidence level basing on thered noise ( dotted line ) . the periodogram values are presented on the left axis . the lower curve illustrates the autocorrelation function of the same time series ( solid line ) . the dotted lines represent two standard errors of the autocorrelation function . the dashed horizontal line shows the zero level . the autocorrelation values are shown in the right axis . ]     because the statistical tests indicate that the time series is a white noise the confidence level is not marked . ]    . ] the method of the diagnosis of an echo - effect in the power spectrum ( de ) consists in an analysis of a periodogram of a given time series computed using the bt method . the bt method bases on the cosine transform of the autocorrelation function which creates peaks which are in the periodogram , but not in the autocorrelation function . the de method is used for peaks which are computed by the fft method ( with high resolution