Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The evolution of Earth-Moon system is described by the dark matter field
fluid model proposed in the Meeting of Division of Particle and Field 2004,
American Physical Society. The current behavior of the Earth-Moon system agrees
with this model very well and the general pattern of the evolution of the
Moon-Earth system described by this model agrees with geological and fossil
evidence. The closest distance of the Moon to Earth was about 259000 km at 4.5
billion years ago, which is far beyond the Roche's limit. The result suggests
that the tidal friction may not be the primary cause for the evolution of the
Earth-Moon system. The average dark matter field fluid constant derived from
Earth-Moon system data is 4.39 x 10^(-22) s^(-1)m^(-1). This model predicts
that the Mars's rotation is also slowing with the angular acceleration rate
about -4.38 x 10^(-22) rad s^(-2).

Categories: nlin.PS, physics.chem-ph, q-bio.MN
Abstract: Spatiotemporal pattern formation in a product-activated enzymic reaction at
high enzyme concentrations is investigated. Stochastic simulations show that
catalytic turnover cycles of individual enzymes can become coherent and that
complex wave patterns of molecular synchronization can develop. The analysis
based on the mean-field approximation indicates that the observed patterns
result from the presence of Hopf and wave bifurcations in the considered
system.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We performed a rigorous theoretical convergence analysis of the discrete
dipole approximation (DDA). We prove that errors in any measured quantity are
bounded by a sum of a linear and quadratic term in the size of a dipole d, when
the latter is in the range of DDA applicability. Moreover, the linear term is
significantly smaller for cubically than for non-cubically shaped scatterers.
Therefore, for small d errors for cubically shaped particles are much smaller
than for non-cubically shaped. The relative importance of the linear term
decreases with increasing size, hence convergence of DDA for large enough
scatterers is quadratic in the common range of d. Extensive numerical
simulations were carried out for a wide range of d. Finally we discuss a number
of new developments in DDA and their consequences for convergence.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We propose an extrapolation technique that allows accuracy improvement of the
discrete dipole approximation computations. The performance of this technique
was studied empirically based on extensive simulations for 5 test cases using
many different discretizations. The quality of the extrapolation improves with
refining discretization reaching extraordinary performance especially for
cubically shaped particles. A two order of magnitude decrease of error was
demonstrated. We also propose estimates of the extrapolation error, which were
proven to be reliable. Finally we propose a simple method to directly separate
shape and discretization errors and illustrated this for one test case.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In this manuscript we investigate the capabilities of the Discrete Dipole
Approximation (DDA) to simulate scattering from particles that are much larger
than the wavelength of the incident light, and describe an optimized publicly
available DDA computer program that processes the large number of dipoles
required for such simulations. Numerical simulations of light scattering by
spheres with size parameters x up to 160 and 40 for refractive index m=1.05 and
2 respectively are presented and compared with exact results of the Mie theory.
Errors of both integral and angle-resolved scattering quantities generally
increase with m and show no systematic dependence on x. Computational times
increase steeply with both x and m, reaching values of more than 2 weeks on a
cluster of 64 processors. The main distinctive feature of the computer program
is the ability to parallelize a single DDA simulation over a cluster of
computers, which allows it to simulate light scattering by very large
particles, like the ones that are considered in this manuscript. Current
limitations and possible ways for improvement are discussed.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We present a review of the discrete dipole approximation (DDA), which is a
general method to simulate light scattering by arbitrarily shaped particles. We
put the method in historical context and discuss recent developments, taking
the viewpoint of a general framework based on the integral equations for the
electric field. We review both the theory of the DDA and its numerical aspects,
the latter being of critical importance for any practical application of the
method. Finally, the position of the DDA among other methods of light
scattering simulation is shown and possible future developments are discussed.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: It is outlined the possibility to extend the quantum formalism in relation to
the requirements of the general systems theory. It can be done by using a
quantum semantics arising from the deep logical structure of quantum theory. It
is so possible taking into account the logical openness relationship between
observer and system. We are going to show how considering the truth-values of
quantum propositions within the context of the fuzzy sets is here more useful
for systemics . In conclusion we propose an example of formal quantum
coherence.

Categories: astro-ph, nlin.CD, physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: We present a theoretical framework for plasma turbulence in astrophysical
plasmas (solar wind, interstellar medium, galaxy clusters, accretion disks).
The key assumptions are that the turbulence is anisotropic with respect to the
mean magnetic field and frequencies are low compared to the ion cyclotron
frequency. The energy injected at the outer scale scale has to be converted
into heat, which ultimately cannot be done without collisions. A KINETIC
CASCADE develops that brings the energy to collisional scales both in space and
velocity. Its nature depends on the physics of plasma fluctuations. In each of
the physically distinct scale ranges, the kinetic problem is systematically
reduced to a more tractable set of equations. In the "inertial range" above the
ion gyroscale, the kinetic cascade splits into a cascade of Alfvenic
fluctuations, which are governed by the RMHD equations at both the collisional
and collisionless scales, and a passive cascade of compressive fluctuations,
which obey a linear kinetic equation along the moving field lines associated
with the Alfvenic component. In the "dissipation range" between the ion and
electron gyroscales, there are again two cascades: the kinetic-Alfven-wave
(KAW) cascade governed by two fluid-like Electron RMHD equations and a passive
phase-space cascade of ion entropy fluctuations. The latter cascade brings the
energy of the inertial-range fluctuations that was damped by collisionless
wave-particle interaction at the ion gyroscale to collisional scales in the
phase space and leads to ion heating. The KAW energy is similarly damped at the
electron gyroscale and converted into electron heat. Kolmogorov-style scaling
relations are derived for these cascades. Astrophysical and space-physical
applications are discussed in detail.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: A novel way of picturing the processing of quantum information is described,
allowing a direct visualization of teleportation of quantum states and
providing a simple and intuitive understanding of this fascinating phenomenon.
The discussion is aimed at providing physicists a method of explaining
teleportation to non-scientists. The basic ideas of quantum physics are first
explained in lay terms, after which these ideas are used with a graphical
description, out of which teleportation arises naturally.

Categories: physics.pop-ph
Abstract: I shall present three arguments for the proposition that intelligent life is
very rare in the universe. First, I shall summarize the consensus opinion of
the founders of the Modern Synthesis (Simpson, Dobzhanski, and Mayr) that the
evolution of intelligent life is exceedingly improbable. Second, I shall
develop the Fermi Paradox: if they existed they'd be here. Third, I shall show
that if intelligent life were too common, it would use up all available
resources and die out. But I shall show that the quantum mechanical principle
of unitarity (actually a form of teleology!) requires intelligent life to
survive to the end of time. Finally, I shall argue that, if the universe is
indeed accelerating, then survival to the end of time requires that intelligent
life, though rare, to have evolved several times in the visible universe. I
shall argue that the acceleration is a consequence of the excess of matter over
antimatter in the universe. I shall suggest experiments to test these claims.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: No abstract given; compares pairs of languages from World Atlas of Language
Structures.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The Dark Energy problem is forcing us to re-examine our models and our
understanding of relativity and space-time. Here a novel idea of Fundamental
Forces is introduced. This allows us to perceive the General Theory of
Relativity and Einstein's Equation from a new pesrpective. In addition to
providing us with an improved understanding of space and time, it will be shown
how it leads to a resolution of the Dark Energy problem.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, nlin.PS, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We employ granular hydrodynamics to investigate a paradigmatic problem of
clustering of particles in a freely cooling dilute granular gas. We consider
large-scale hydrodynamic motions where the viscosity and heat conduction can be
neglected, and one arrives at the equations of ideal gas dynamics with an
additional term describing bulk energy losses due to inelastic collisions. We
employ Lagrangian coordinates and derive a broad family of exact non-stationary
analytical solutions that depend only on one spatial coordinate. These
solutions exhibit a new type of singularity, where the gas density blows up in
a finite time when starting from smooth initial conditions. The density blowups
signal formation of close-packed clusters of particles. As the density blow-up
time $t_c$ is approached, the maximum density exhibits a power law $\sim
(t_c-t)^{-2}$. The velocity gradient blows up as $\sim - (t_c-t)^{-1}$ while
the velocity itself remains continuous and develops a cusp (rather than a shock
discontinuity) at the singularity. The gas temperature vanishes at the
singularity, and the singularity follows the isobaric scenario: the gas
pressure remains finite and approximately uniform in space and constant in time
close to the singularity. An additional exact solution shows that the density
blowup, of the same type, may coexist with an "ordinary" shock, at which the
hydrodynamic fields are discontinuous but finite. We confirm stability of the
exact solutions with respect to small one-dimensional perturbations by solving
the ideal hydrodynamic equations numerically. Furthermore, numerical solutions
show that the local features of the density blowup hold universally,
independently of details of the initial and boundary conditions.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The results of the spectral, energetical and temporal characteristics of
radiation in the presence of the photonic flame effect are presented.
Artificial opal posed on Cu plate at the temperature of liquid nitrogen boiling
point (77 K) being irradiated by nanosecond ruby laser pulse produces long-
term luminiscence with a duration till ten seconds with a finely structured
spectrum in the the antistocks part of the spectrum. Analogous visible
luminescence manifesting time delay appeared in other samples of the artificial
opals posed on the same plate. In the case of the opal infiltrated with
different nonlinear liquids the threshold of the luminiscence is reduced and
the spatial disribution of the bright emmiting area on the opal surface is
being changed. In the case of the putting the frozen nonlinear liquids on the
Cu plate long-term blue bright luminiscence took place in the frozen species of
the liquids. Temporal characteristics of this luminiscence are nearly the same
as in opal matrixes.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Statistical modeling of experimental physical laws is based on the
probability density function of measured variables. It is expressed by
experimental data via a kernel estimator. The kernel is determined objectively
by the scattering of data during calibration of experimental setup. A physical
law, which relates measured variables, is optimally extracted from experimental
data by the conditional average estimator. It is derived directly from the
kernel estimator and corresponds to a general nonparametric regression. The
proposed method is demonstrated by the modeling of a return map of noisy
chaotic data. In this example, the nonparametric regression is used to predict
a future value of chaotic time series from the present one. The mean predictor
error is used in the definition of predictor quality, while the redundancy is
expressed by the mean square distance between data points. Both statistics are
used in a new definition of predictor cost function. From the minimum of the
predictor cost function, a proper number of data in the model is estimated.

Categories: cs.CE, cond-mat.stat-mech, cs.MS, cs.NA, physics.data-an
Abstract: Real Options for Project Schedules (ROPS) has three recursive
sampling/optimization shells. An outer Adaptive Simulated Annealing (ASA)
optimization shell optimizes parameters of strategic Plans containing multiple
Projects containing ordered Tasks. A middle shell samples probability
distributions of durations of Tasks. An inner shell samples probability
distributions of costs of Tasks. PATHTREE is used to develop options on
schedules.. Algorithms used for Trading in Risk Dimensions (TRD) are applied to
develop a relative risk analysis among projects.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: A physical law is represented by the probability distribution of a measured
variable. The probability density is described by measured data using an
estimator whose kernel is the instrument scattering function. The experimental
information and data redundancy are defined in terms of information entropy.
The model cost function, comprised of data redundancy and estimation error, is
minimized by the creation-annihilation process.

Categories: nlin.CD, cond-mat.other, physics.optics
Abstract: The microwave phonon stimulated emission (SE) has been experimentally and
numerically investigated in a nonautonomous microwave acoustic quantum
generator, called also microwave phonon laser or phaser (see previous works
arXiv:cond-mat/0303188 ; arXiv:cond-mat/0402640 ; arXiv:nlin.CG/0703050)
Phenomena of branching and long-time refractority (absence of the reaction on
the external pulses) for deterministic chaotic and regular processes of SE were
observed in experiments with various levels of electromagnetic pumping. At the
pumping level growth, the clearly depined increasing of the number of
coexisting SE states has been observed both in real physical experiments and in
computer simulations. This confirms the analytical estimations of the branching
density in the phase space. The nature of the refractority of SE pulses is
closely connected with the pointed branching and reflects the crises of strange
attractors, i.e. their collisions with unstable periodic components of the
higher branches of SE states in the nonautonomous microwave phonon laser.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Based on overall experimental observations, especially the pair processes, I
developed a model structure of the vacuum along with a basic-particle formation
scheme begun in 2000 (with collaborator P-I Johansson). The model consists in
that the vacuum is, briefly, filled of neutral but polarizable vacuuons,
consisting each of a p-vaculeon and n- vaculeon of charges $+e$ and $-e$ of
zero rest masses but with spin motions, assumed interacting each other with a
Coulomb force. The model has been introduced in full in a book (Nova Sci, 2005)
and referred to in a number of journal/E-print papers. I outline in this easier
accessible paper the detailed derivation of the model and a corresponding
quantitative determination of the vacuuon size.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The 32-dimensional compounding fields and their quantum interplays in the
trigintaduonion space can be presented by analogy with octonion and sedenion
electromagnetic, gravitational, strong and weak interactions. In the
trigintaduonion fields which are associated with the electromagnetic,
gravitational, strong and weak interactions, the study deduces some conclusions
of field source particles (quarks and leptons) and intermediate particles which
are consistent with current some sorts of interaction theories. In the
trigintaduonion fields which are associated with the hyper-strong and
strong-weak fields, the paper draws some predicts and conclusions of the field
source particles (sub-quarks) and intermediate particles. The research results
show that there may exist some new particles in the nature.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: Statistical ensemble formalism of Kim, Mandel and Wolf (J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4,
433 (1987)) offers a realistic model for characterizing the effect of
stochastic non-image forming optical media on the state of polarization of
transmittedlight. With suitable choice of the Jones ensemble, various Mueller
transformations - some of which have been unknown so far - are deduced. It is
observed that the ensemble approach is formally identical to the positive
operator valued measures (POVM) on the quantum density matrix. This
observation, in combination with the recent suggestion by Ahnert and Payne
(Phys. Rev. A 71, 012330, (2005)) - in the context of generalized quantum
measurement on single photon polarization states - that linear optics elements
can be employed in setting up all possible POVMs, enables us to propose a way
of realizing different types of Mueller devices.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The extraction of a physical law y=yo(x) from joint experimental data about x
and y is treated. The joint, the marginal and the conditional probability
density functions (PDF) are expressed by given data over an estimator whose
kernel is the instrument scattering function. As an optimal estimator of yo(x)
the conditional average is proposed. The analysis of its properties is based
upon a new definition of prediction quality. The joint experimental information
and the redundancy of joint measurements are expressed by the relative entropy.
With the number of experiments the redundancy on average increases, while the
experimental information converges to a certain limit value. The difference
between this limit value and the experimental information at a finite number of
data represents the discrepancy between the experimentally determined and the
true properties of the phenomenon. The sum of the discrepancy measure and the
redundancy is utilized as a cost function. By its minimum a reasonable number
of data for the extraction of the law yo(x) is specified. The mutual
information is defined by the marginal and the conditional PDFs of the
variables. The ratio between mutual information and marginal information is
used to indicate which variable is the independent one. The properties of the
introduced statistics are demonstrated on deterministically and randomly
related variables.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Classical oscillator differential equation is replaced by the corresponding
(finite time) difference equation. The equation is, then, symmetrized so that
it remains invariant under the change d going to -d, where d is the smallest
span of time. This symmetric equation has solutions, which come in reciprocally
related pairs. One member of a pair agrees with the classical solution and the
other is an oscillating solution and does not converge to a limit as d goes to
0. This solution contributes to oscillator energy a term which is a multiple of
half-integers.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, cond-mat.soft, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: An overview of some analytical approaches to the computation of the
structural and thermodynamic properties of single component and multicomponent
hard-sphere fluids is provided. For the structural properties, they yield a
thermodynamically consistent formulation, thus improving and extending the
known analytical results of the Percus-Yevick theory. Approximate expressions
for the contact values of the radial distribution functions and the
corresponding analytical equations of state are also discussed. Extensions of
this methodology to related systems, such as sticky hard spheres and
square-well fluids, as well as its use in connection with the perturbation
theory of fluids are briefly addressed.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Redundancy of experimental data is the basic statistic from which the
complexity of a natural phenomenon and the proper number of experiments needed
for its exploration can be estimated. The redundancy is expressed by the
entropy of information pertaining to the probability density function of
experimental variables. Since the calculation of entropy is inconvenient due to
integration over a range of variables, an approximate expression for redundancy
is derived that includes only a sum over the set of experimental data about
these variables. The approximation makes feasible an efficient estimation of
the redundancy of data along with the related experimental information and
information cost function. From the experimental information the complexity of
the phenomenon can be simply estimated, while the proper number of experiments
needed for its exploration can be determined from the minimum of the cost
function. The performance of the approximate estimation of these statistics is
demonstrated on two-dimensional normally distributed random data.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Using the recently reported mode locking effect we demonstrate a highly
robust control of electron spin coherence in an ensemble of (In,Ga)As quantum
dots during the single spin coherence time. The spin precession in a transverse
magnetic field can be fully controlled up to 25 K by the parameters of the
exciting pulsed laser protocol such as the pulse train sequence, leading to
adjustable quantum beat bursts in Faraday rotation. Flipping of the electron
spin precession phase was demonstrated by inverting the polarization within a
pulse doublet sequence.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We calculate the equation of state of dense hydrogen within the chemical
picture. Fluid variational theory is generalized for a multi-component system
of molecules, atoms, electrons, and protons. Chemical equilibrium is supposed
for the reactions dissociation and ionization. We identify the region of
thermodynamic instability which is related to the plasma phase transition. The
reflectivity is calculated along the Hugoniot curve and compared with
experimental results. The equation-of-state data is used to calculate the
pressure and temperature profiles for the interior of Jupiter.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We investigate the use of a Genetic Algorithm (GA) to design a set of
photonic crystals (PCs) in one and two dimensions. Our flexible design
methodology allows us to optimize PC structures which are optimized for
specific objectives. In this paper, we report the results of several such
GA-based PC optimizations. We show that the GA performs well even in very
complex design spaces, and therefore has great potential for use as a robust
design tool in present and future applications.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.data-an, q-bio.BM
Abstract: A number of recently discovered protein structures incorporate a rather
unexpected structural feature: a knot in the polypeptide backbone. These knots
are extremely rare, but their occurrence is likely connected to protein
function in as yet unexplored fashion. Our analysis of the complete Protein
Data Bank reveals several new knots which, along with previously discovered
ones, can shed light on such connections. In particular, we identify the most
complex knot discovered to date in human ubiquitin hydrolase, and suggest that
its entangled topology protects it against unfolding and degradation by the
proteasome. Knots in proteins are typically preserved across species and
sometimes even across kingdoms. However, we also identify a knot which only
appears in some transcarbamylases while being absent in homologous proteins of
similar structure. The emergence of the knot is accompanied by a shift in the
enzymatic function of the protein. We suggest that the simple insertion of a
short DNA fragment into the gene may suffice to turn an unknotted into a
knotted structure in this protein.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We theoretically investigate the possibility of observing resonant activation
in the hopping dynamics of two-mode semiconductor lasers. We present a series
of simulations of a rate-equations model under random and periodic modulation
of the bias current. In both cases, for an optimal choice of the modulation
time-scale, the hopping times between the stable lasing modes attain a minimum.
The simulation data are understood by means of an effective one-dimensional
Langevin equation with multiplicative fluctuations. Our conclusions apply to
both Edge Emitting and Vertical Cavity Lasers, thus opening the way to several
experimental tests in such optical systems.

Categories: physics.optics, math-ph, math.MP
Abstract: There is currently a great deal of interest in the theoretical and practical
possibility of cloaking objects from the observation by electromagnetic waves.
The basic idea of these invisibility devices \cite{glu1, glu2, le},\cite{pss1}
is to use anisotropic {\it transformation media} whose permittivity and
permeability $\var^{\lambda\nu}, \mu^{\lambda\nu}$, are obtained from the ones,
$\var_0^{\lambda\nu}, \mu^{\lambda\nu}_0$, of isotropic media, by singular
transformations of coordinates. In this paper we study electromagnetic cloaking
in the time-domain using the formalism of time-dependent scattering theory.
This formalism allows us to settle in an unambiguous way the mathematical
problems posed by the singularities of the inverse of the permittivity and the
permeability of the {\it transformation media} on the boundary of the cloaked
objects. We write Maxwell's equations in Schr\"odinger form with the
electromagnetic propagator playing the role of the Hamiltonian. We prove that
the electromagnetic propagator outside of the cloaked objects is essentially
self-adjoint. Moreover, the unique self-adjoint extension is unitarily
equivalent to the electromagnetic propagator in the medium
$\var_0^{\lambda\nu}, \mu^{\lambda\nu}_0$. Using this fact, and since the
coordinate transformation is the identity outside of a ball, we prove that the
scattering operator is the identity. Our results give a rigorous proof that the
construction of \cite{glu1, glu2, le}, \cite{pss1} perfectly cloaks passive and
active devices from observation by electromagnetic waves. Furthermore, we prove
cloaking for general anisotropic materials. In particular, our results prove
that it is possible to cloak objects inside general crystals.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We study material lines and passive vectors in a model of turbulent flow at
infinite-Reynolds number, the Kraichnan-Kazantsev ensemble of velocities that
are white-noise in time and rough (Hoelder continuous) in space. It is argued
that the phenomenon of ``spontaneous stochasticity'' generalizes to material
lines and that conservation of circulations generalizes to a ``martingale
property'' of the stochastic process of lines.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We present a new version of TaylUR, a Fortran 95 module to automatically
compute the numerical values of a complex-valued function's derivatives with
respect to several variables up to an arbitrary order in each variable, but
excluding mixed derivatives. The new version fixes a potentially serious bug in
the code for exponential-related functions that could corrupt the imaginary
parts of derivatives, as well as being compatible with a wider range of
compilers.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, cond-mat.other
Abstract: We present experimental and theoretical results showing the improved beam
quality and reduced divergence of an atom laser produced by an optical Raman
transition, compared to one produced by an RF transition. We show that Raman
outcoupling can eliminate the diverging lens effect that the condensate has on
the outcoupled atoms. This substantially improves the beam quality of the atom
laser, and the improvement may be greater than a factor of ten for experiments
with tight trapping potentials. We show that Raman outcoupling can produce atom
lasers whose quality is only limited by the wavefunction shape of the
condensate that produces them, typically a factor of 1.3 above the Heisenberg
limit.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: Air fluorescence detectors measure the energy of ultra-high energy cosmic
rays by collecting fluorescence light emitted from nitrogen molecules along the
extensive air shower cascade. To ensure a reliable energy determination, the
light signal needs to be corrected for atmospheric effects, which not only
attenuate the signal, but also produce a non-negligible background component
due to scattered Cherenkov light and multiple-scattered light. The correction
requires regular measurements of the aerosol attenuation length and the aerosol
phase function, defined as the probability of light scattered in a given
direction. At the Pierre Auger Observatory in Malargue, Argentina, the phase
function is measured on an hourly basis using two Aerosol Phase Function (APF)
light sources. These sources direct a UV light beam across the field of view of
the fluorescence detectors; the phase function can be extracted from the image
of the shots in the fluorescence detector cameras. This paper describes the
design, current status, standard operation procedure, and performance of the
APF system at the Pierre Auger Observatory.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We present a model for the spontaneous formation of a striated pattern in
polymerizing microtubule solutions. It describes the buckling of a single
microtubule (MT) bundle within an elastic network formed by other similarly
aligned and buckling bundles and unaligned MTs. Phase contrast and polarization
microscopy studies of the temporal evolution of the pattern imply that the
polymerization of MTs within the bundles creates the driving compressional
force. Using the measured rate of buckling, the established MT force-velocity
curve and the pattern wavelength, we obtain reasonable estimates for the MT
bundle bending rigidity and the elastic constant of the network. The analysis
implies that the bundles buckle as solid rods.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The ever-increasing knowledge of the structure of various real-world networks
has uncovered their complex multi-mechanism-governed evolution processes.
Therefore, a better understanding of the structure and evolution of these
networked complex systems requires us to describe such processes in a more
detailed and realistic manner. In this paper, we introduce a new type of
network growth rule which comprises addition and deletion of nodes, and propose
an evolving network model to investigate the effect of node deleting on network
structure. It is found that, with the introduction of node deleting, network
structure is significantly transformed. In particular, degree distribution of
the network undergoes a transition from scale-free to exponential forms as the
intensity of node deleting increases. At the same time, nontrivial
disassortative degree correlation develops spontaneously as a natural result of
network evolution in the model. We also demonstrate that node deleting
introduced in the model does not destroy the connectedness of a growing network
so long as the increasing rate of edges is not excessively small. In addition,
it is found that node deleting will weaken but not eliminate the small-world
effect of a growing network, and generally it will decrease the clustering
coefficient in a network.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.ins-det
Abstract: We report on measurements of the transverse fluctuations of a string in a
turbulent air jet flow. Harmonic modes are excited by the fluctuating drag
force, at different wave-numbers. This simple mechanical probe makes it
possible to measure excitations of the flow at specific scales, averaged over
space and time: it is a scale-resolved, global measurement. We also measure the
dissipation associated to the string motion, and we consider the ratio of the
fluctuations over dissipation (FDR). In an exploratory approach, we investigate
the concept of {\it effective temperature} defined through the FDR. We compare
our observations with other definitions of temperature in turbulence. From the
theory of Kolmogorov (1941), we derive the exponent -11/3 expected for the
spectrum of the fluctuations. This simple model and our experimental results
are in good agreement, over the range of wave-numbers, and Reynolds number
accessible ($74000 \leq Re \leq 170000$).

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In line with the local philicity concept proposed by Chattaraj et al.
(Chattaraj, P. K.; Maiti, B.; Sarkar, U. J. Phys. Chem. A. 2003, 107, 4973) and
a dual descriptor derived by Toro-Labbe and coworkers (Morell, C.; Grand, A.;
Toro-Labbe, A. J. Phys. Chem. A. 2005, 109, 205), we propose a multiphilic
descriptor. It is defined as the difference between nucleophilic (Wk+) and
electrophilic (Wk-) condensed philicity functions. This descriptor is capable
of simultaneously explaining the nucleophilicity and electrophilicity of the
given atomic sites in the molecule. Variation of these quantities along the
path of a soft reaction is also analyzed. Predictive ability of this descriptor
has been successfully tested on the selected systems and reactions.
Corresponding force profiles are also analyzed in some representative cases.
Also, to study the intra- and intermolecular reactivities another related
descriptor namely, the nucleophilicity excess (DelW-+) for a nucleophile, over
the electrophilicity in it has been defined and tested on all-metal aromatic
compounds.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In spite of the large number of papers appeared in the past which are devoted
to the lattice Boltzmann (LB) methods, basic aspects of the theory still remain
unchallenged. An unsolved theoretical issue is related to the construction of a
discrete kinetic theory which yields \textit{exactly} the fluid equations,
i.e., is non-asymptotic (here denoted as \textit{LB inverse kinetic theory}).
The purpose of this paper is theoretical and aims at developing an inverse
kinetic approach of this type. In principle infinite solutions exist to this
problem but the freedom can be exploited in order to meet important
requirements. In particular, the discrete kinetic theory can be defined so that
it yields exactly the fluid equation also for arbitrary non-equilibrium (but
suitably smooth) kinetic distribution functions and arbitrarily close to the
boundary of the fluid domain. Unlike previous entropic LB methods the theorem
can be obtained without functional constraints on the class of the initial
distribution functions. Possible realizations of the theory and asymptotic
approximations are provided which permit to determine the fluid equations
\textit{with prescribed accuracy.} As a result, asymptotic accuracy estimates
of customary LB approaches and comparisons with the Chorin artificial
compressibility method are discussed.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We study numerically the cascading failure problem by using artificially
created scale-free networks and the real network structure of the power grid.
The capacity for a vertex is assigned as a monotonically increasing function of
the load (or the betweenness centrality). Through the use of a simple
functional form with two free parameters, revealed is that it is indeed
possible to make networks more robust while spending less cost. We suggest that
our method to prevent cascade by protecting less vertices is particularly
important for the design of more robust real-world networks to cascading
failures.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Ponderable objects moving in free space according to Newton's First Law
constitute both rulers and clocks when one such object is viewed from the rest
frame of another. Together with the Reciprocity Principle this is used to
demonstrate, in both Galilean and special relativity, the invariance of the
measured length of a ruler in motion. The different times: `proper', `improper'
and `apparent' appearing in different formulations of the relativistic time
dilatation relation are discussed and exemplified by experimental applications.
A non-intuitive `length expansion' effect predicted by the Reciprocity
Principle as a necessary consequence of time dilatation is pointed out

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: This paper has been withdrawn due to copyright reasons.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The structure of three laminar premixed rich flames has been investigated: a
pure methane flame and two methane flames doped by allene and propyne,
respectively. The gases of the three flames contain 20.9% (molar) of methane
and 33.4% of oxygen, corresponding to an equivalence ratio of 1.25 for the pure
methane flame. In both doped flames, 2.49% of C3H4 was added, corresponding to
a ratio C3H4/CH4 of 12% and an equivalence ratio of 1.55. The three flames have
been stabilized on a burner at a pressure of 6.7 kPa using argon as dilutant,
with a gas velocity at the burner of 36 cm/s at 333 K. The concentration
profiles of stable species were measured by gas chromatography after sampling
with a quartz microprobe. Quantified species included carbon monoxide and
dioxide, methane, oxygen, hydrogen, ethane, ethylene, acetylene, propyne,
allene, propene, propane, 1,2-butadiene, 1,3-butadiene, 1-butene, isobutene,
1-butyne, vinylacetylene, and benzene. The temperature was measured using a
PtRh (6%)-PtRh (30%) thermocouple settled inside the enclosure and ranged from
700 K close to the burner up to 1850 K. In order to model these new results,
some improvements have been made to a mechanism previously developed in our
laboratory for the reactions of C3-C4 unsaturated hydrocarbons. The main
reaction pathways of consumption of allene and propyne and of formation of C6
aromatic species have been derived from flow rate analyses.

Categories: q-bio.NC, cond-mat.dis-nn, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Structure entails function and thus a structural description of the brain
will help to understand its function and may provide insights into many
properties of brain systems, from their robustness and recovery from damage, to
their dynamics and even their evolution. Advances in the analysis of complex
networks provide useful new approaches to understanding structural and
functional properties of brain networks. Structural properties of networks
recently described allow their characterization as small-world, random
(exponential) and scale-free. They complement the set of other properties that
have been explored in the context of brain connectivity, such as topology,
hodology, clustering, and hierarchical organization. Here we apply new network
analysis methods to cortical inter-areal connectivity networks for the cat and
macaque brains. We compare these corticocortical fibre networks to benchmark
rewired, small-world, scale-free and random networks, using two analysis
strategies, in which we measure the effects of the removal of nodes and
connections on the structural properties of the cortical networks. The brain
networks' structural decay is in most respects similar to that of scale-free
networks. The results implicate highly connected hub-nodes and bottleneck
connections as structural basis for some of the conditional robustness of brain
systems. This informs the understanding of the development of brain networks'
connectivity.

Categories: quant-ph, hep-th, nlin.CD, physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We present an analytic example of two dimensional quantum mechanical system,
where the exponential suppression of the probability of over-barrier reflection
changes non-monotonically with energy. The suppression is minimal at certain
"optimal" energies where reflection occurs with exponentially larger
probability than at other energies.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Using complex plane analysis we show that left-handed slab may support either
leaky slab waves, which are backward because of negative refraction, or leaky
surface waves, which are backward or forward depending on the propagation
direction of the surface wave itself. Moreover, there is a general connection
between the reflection coefficient of the left-handed slab and the one of the
corresponding right-handed slab (with opposite permittivity and permeability)
so that leaky slab modes are excited for the same angle of incidence of the
impinging beam for both structures. Many negative giant lateral shifts can be
explained by the excitation of these leaky modes.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We experimentally demonstrate controlled polarization-selective phenomena in
a whispering gallery mode resonator. We observed efficient ($\approx 75 %$)
polarization conversion of light in a silica microsphere coupled to a tapered
optical fiber with proper optimization of the polarization of the propagating
light. A simple model treating the microsphere as a ring resonator provides a
good fit to the observed behavior.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We report a new effect of surfactants in pinning a drop contact line,
specifically that lysozyme promotes while lauryl sulfate inhibits pinning. We
explain the pinning disparity assuming difference in wetting: the protein-laden
drop wets a "clean" surface and the surfactant-laden drop wets an
auto-precursored surface.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: How to effectively solve the eigen solutions of the nonlinear spinor field
equation coupling with some other interaction fields is important to understand
the behavior of the elementary particles. In this paper, we derive a simplified
form of the eigen equation of the nonlinear spinor, and then propose a scheme
to solve their numerical solutions. This simplified equation has elegant and
neat structure, which is more convenient for both theoretical analysis and
numerical computation.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: We show that two distinct quantum states of the electromagnetic field can be
associated to a classical vector X wave or a propagation-invariant solution of
Maxwell equations. The difference between the two states is of pure quantum
mechanical origin since they are internally entangled and disentangled,
respectively and can be generated by different linear or nonlinear processes.
Detection and generation of Schr\"odinger-cat states comprising two entangled
X-waves and their possible applications are discussed.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We measured the correlation of the times between successive flaps of a flag
for a variety of wind speeds and found no evidence of low dimensional chaotic
behavior in the return maps of these times. We instead observed what is best
modeled as random times determined by an exponential distribution. This study
was done as an undergraduate experiment and illustrates the differences between
low dimensional chaotic and possibly higher dimensional chaotic systems.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Because observations of galaxies and clusters have been found inconsistent
with General Relativity (GR), the focus of effort in developing a Scalar
Potential Model (SPM) has been on the examination of galaxies and clusters. The
SPM has been found to be consistent with cluster cellular structure, the flow
of IGM from spiral galaxies to elliptical galaxies, intergalactic redshift
without an expanding universe, discrete redshift, rotation curve (RC) data
without dark matter, asymmetric RCs, galaxy central mass, galaxy central
velocity dispersion, and the Pioneer Anomaly. In addition, the SPM suggests a
model of past expansion, past contraction, and current expansion of the
universe. GR corresponds to the SPM in the limit in which the effect of the
Sources and Sinks approximate a flat scalar potential field such as between
clusters and on the solar system scale, which is small relative to the distance
to a Source.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.other, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In this paper we investigate some entanglement properties for the Hydrogen
molecule considered as a two interacting spin 1/2 (qubit) model. The
entanglement related to the $H_{2}$ molecule is evaluated both using the von
Neumann entropy and the Concurrence and it is compared with the corresponding
quantities for the two interacting spin system. Many aspects of these functions
are examinated employing in part analytical and, essentially, numerical
techniques. We have compared analogous results obtained by Huang and Kais a few
years ago. In this respect, some possible controversial situations are
presented and discussed.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Useful information about scientific collaboration structures and patterns can
be inferred from computer databases of published papers. The genetic
programming bibliography is the most complete reference of papers on GP\@. In
addition to locating publications, it contains coauthor and coeditor
relationships from which a more complete picture of the field emerges. We treat
these relationships as undirected small world graphs whose study reveals the
community structure of the GP collaborative social network. Automatic analysis
discovers new communities and highlights new facets of them. The investigation
reveals many similarities between GP and coauthorship networks in other
scientific fields but also some subtle differences such as a smaller central
network component and a high clustering.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: During a crossover via a switching mechanism from one 2-body potential to
another as might be applied in modeling (chemical) reactions in the vicinity of
bond formation, energy violations would occur due to finite step size which
determines the trajectory of the particles relative to the potential
interactions of the unbonded state by numerical (e.g. Verlet) integration. This
problem is overcome by an algorithm which preserves the coordinates of the
system for each move, but corrects for energy discrepancies by ensuring both
energy and momentum conservation in the dynamics. The algorithm is tested for a
hysteresis loop reaction model with an without the implementation of the
algorithm. The tests involve checking the rate of energy flow out of the MD
simulation box; in the equilibrium state, no net rate of flows within
experimental error should be observed. The temperature and pressure of the box
should also be invariant within the range of fluctuation of these quantities.
It is demonstrated that the algorithm satisfies these criteria.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: An overview is presented of laser spectroscopy experiments with cold,
trapped, highly-charged ions, which will be performed at the HITRAP facility at
GSI in Darmstadt (Germany). These high-resolution measurements of ground state
hyperfine splittings will be three orders of magnitude more precise than
previous measurements. Moreover, from a comparison of measurements of the
hyperfine splittings in hydrogen- and lithium-like ions of the same isotope,
QED effects at high electromagnetic fields can be determined within a few
percent. Several candidate ions suited for these laser spectroscopy studies are
presented.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: A new method, FM-FTS, combining Frequency Modulation heterodyne laser
spectroscopy and Fourier Transform Spectroscopy is presented. It provides
simultaneous sensitive measurement of absorption and dispersion profiles with
broadband spectral coverage capabilities. Experimental demonstration is made on
the overtone spectrum of C2H2 in the 1.5 $\mu$m region.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In the last years the traditional scenario of Big Bang has been deeply
modified by the study of the quantum features of the Universe evolution,
proposing again the problem of using local physical laws on cosmic scale, with
particular regard to the cosmological constant role. The group extention method
shows that the De Sitter group univocally generalizes the Poincare group,
formally justifies the cosmological constant use and suggests a new
interpretation for Hartle-Hawking boundary conditions in Quantum Cosmology.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: We discuss an alternative non-perturbative proof of Bertrand's theorem that
leads in a concise way directly to the two allowed fields: the newtonian and
the isotropic harmonic oscillator central fields.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.soc-ph, q-fin.ST
Abstract: We analyze 27 house price indexes of Las Vegas from Jun. 1983 to Mar. 2005,
corresponding to 27 different zip codes. These analyses confirm the existence
of a real-estate bubble, defined as a price acceleration faster than
exponential, which is found however to be confined to a rather limited time
interval in the recent past from approximately 2003 to mid-2004 and has
progressively transformed into a more normal growth rate comparable to
pre-bubble levels in 2005. There has been no bubble till 2002 except for a
medium-sized surge in 1990. In addition, we have identified a strong yearly
periodicity which provides a good potential for fine-tuned prediction from
month to month. A monthly monitoring using a model that we have developed could
confirm, by testing the intra-year structure, if indeed the market has returned
to ``normal'' or if more turbulence is expected ahead. We predict the evolution
of the indexes one year ahead, which is validated with new data up to Sep.
2006. The present analysis demonstrates the existence of very significant
variations at the local scale, in the sense that the bubble in Las Vegas seems
to have preceded the more global USA bubble and has ended approximately two
years earlier (mid 2004 for Las Vegas compared with mid-2006 for the whole of
the USA).

Categories: cond-mat.other, physics.optics, quant-ph
Abstract: We give a microscopic derivation of the Clausius-Mossotti relations for a
homogeneous and isotropic magneto-dielectric medium consisting of radiatively
broadened atomic oscillators. To this end the diagram series of electromagnetic
propagators is calculated exactly for an infinite bi-cubic lattice of
dielectric and magnetic dipoles for a lattice constant small compared to the
resonance wavelength $\lambda$. Modifications of transition frequencies and
linewidth of the elementary oscillators are taken into account in a
selfconsistent way by a proper incorporation of the singular self-interaction
terms. We show that in radiatively broadened media sufficiently close to the
free-space resonance the real part of the index of refraction approaches the
value -2 in the limit of $\rho \lambda^3 \gg 1$, where $\rho$ is the number
density of scatterers. Since at the same time the imaginary part vanishes as
$1/\rho$ local field effects can have important consequences for realizing
low-loss negative index materials.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, q-bio.PE
Abstract: Despite their claimed biological plausibility, most self organizing networks
have strict topological constraints and consequently they cannot take into
account a wide range of external stimuli. Furthermore their evolution is
conditioned by deterministic laws which often are not correlated with the
structural parameters and the global status of the network, as it should happen
in a real biological system. In nature the environmental inputs are noise
affected and fuzzy. Which thing sets the problem to investigate the possibility
of emergent behaviour in a not strictly constrained net and subjected to
different inputs. It is here presented a new model of Evolutionary Neural Gas
(ENG) with any topological constraints, trained by probabilistic laws depending
on the local distortion errors and the network dimension. The network is
considered as a population of nodes that coexist in an ecosystem sharing local
and global resources. Those particular features allow the network to quickly
adapt to the environment, according to its dimensions. The ENG model analysis
shows that the net evolves as a scale-free graph, and justifies in a deeply
physical sense- the term gas here used.

Categories: physics.optics, cond-mat.soft, nlin.PS, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We investigate the formation of collisionless shocks along the spatial
profile of a gaussian laser beam propagating in nonlocal nonlinear media. For
defocusing nonlinearity the shock survives the smoothing effect of the nonlocal
response, though its dynamics is qualitatively affected by the latter, whereas
for focusing nonlinearity it dominates over filamentation. The patterns
observed in a thermal defocusing medium are interpreted in the framework of our
theory.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: Efficient control of a laser welding process requires the reliable prediction
of process behavior. A statistical method of field modeling, based on
normalized RBFNN, can be successfully used to predict the spatiotemporal
dynamics of surface optical activity in the laser welding process. In this
article we demonstrate how to optimize RBFNN to maximize prediction quality.
Special attention is paid to the structure of sample vectors, which represent
the bridge between the field distributions in the past and future.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We show that recent stock market fluctuations are characterized by the
cumulative distributions whose tails on short, minute time scales exhibit power
scaling with the scaling index alpha > 3 and this index tends to increase
quickly with decreasing sampling frequency. Our study is based on
high-frequency recordings of the S&P500, DAX and WIG20 indices over the
interval May 2004 - May 2006. Our findings suggest that dynamics of the
contemporary market may differ from the one observed in the past. This effect
indicates a constantly increasing efficiency of world markets.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.ins-det, physics.optics
Abstract: We report on a new type of experiment that enables us to monitor spatially
and temporally heterogeneous dynamic properties in complex fluids. Our approach
is based on the analysis of near-field speckles produced by light diffusely
reflected from the superficial volume of a strongly scattering medium. By
periodic modulation of an incident speckle beam we obtain pixel-wise ensemble
averages of the structure function coefficient, a measure of the dynamic
activity. To illustrate the application of our approach we follow the different
stages in the drying process of a colloidal thin film. We show that we can
access ensemble averaged dynamic properties on length scales as small as ten
micrometers over the full field of view.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The purpose of this paper is to assess the statistical characterization of
weighted networks in terms of the generalization of the relevant parameters,
namely average path length, degree distribution and clustering coefficient.
Although the degree distribution and the average path length admit
straightforward generalizations, for the clustering coefficient several
different definitions have been proposed in the literature. We examined the
different definitions and identified the similarities and differences between
them. In order to elucidate the significance of different definitions of the
weighted clustering coefficient, we studied their dependence on the weights of
the connections. For this purpose, we introduce the relative perturbation norm
of the weights as an index to assess the weight distribution. This study
revealed new interesting statistical regularities in terms of the relative
perturbation norm useful for the statistical characterization of weighted
graphs.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Simulations of physicists for the competition between adult languages since
2003 are reviewed. How many languages are spoken by how many people? How many
languages are contained in various language families? How do language
similarities decay with geographical distance, and what effects do natural
boundaries have? New simulations of bilinguality are given in an appendix.

Categories: hep-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Photon splitting due to vacuum polarization in a laser field is considered.
Using an operator technique, we derive the amplitudes for arbitrary strength,
spectral content and polarization of the laser field. The case of a
monochromatic circularly polarized laser field is studied in detail and the
amplitudes are obtained as three-fold integrals. The asymptotic behavior of the
amplitudes for various limits of interest are investigated also in the case of
a linearly polarized laser field. Using the obtained results, the possibility
of experimental observation of the process is discussed.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The thermal decomposition of norbornane (dissolved in benzene) has been
studied in a jet stirred reactor at temperatures between 873 and 973 K, at
residence times ranging from 1 to 4 s and at atmospheric pressure, leading to
conversions from 0.04 to 22.6%. 25 reaction products were identified and
quantified by gas chromatography, amongst which the main ones are hydrogen,
ethylene and 1,3-cyclopentadiene. A mechanism investigation of the thermal
decomposition of the norbornane - benzene binary mixture has been performed.
Reactions involved in the mechanism have been reviewed: unimolecular
initiations 1 by C-C bond scission of norbornane, fate of the generated
diradicals, reactions of transfer and propagation of norbornyl radicals,
reactions of benzene and cross-coupling reactions.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: This work reports a theoretical study of the gas phase unimolecular
decomposition of cyclobutane, cyclopentane and cyclohexane by means of quantum
chemical calculations. A biradical mechanism has been envisaged for each
cycloalkane, and the main routes for the decomposition of the biradicals formed
have been investigated at the CBS-QB3 level of theory. Thermochemical data
(\delta H^0_f, S^0, C^0_p) for all the involved species have been obtained by
means of isodesmic reactions. The contribution of hindered rotors has also been
included. Activation barriers of each reaction have been analyzed to assess the
1 energetically most favorable pathways for the decomposition of biradicals.
Rate constants have been derived for all elementary reactions using transition
state theory at 1 atm and temperatures ranging from 600 to 2000 K. Global rate
constant for the decomposition of the cyclic alkanes in molecular products have
been calculated. Comparison between calculated and experimental results allowed
to validate the theoretical approach. An important result is that the
rotational barriers between the conformers, which are usually neglected, are of
importance in decomposition rate of the largest biradicals. Ring strain
energies (RSE) in transition states for ring opening have been estimated and
show that the main part of RSE contained in the cyclic reactants is removed
upon the activation process.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: A review of theoretical and experimental studies of thermal effects in
solid-state lasers is presented, with a special focus on diode-pumped
ytterbium-doped materials. A large part of this review provides however general
information applicable to any kind of solid-state laser. Our aim here is not to
make a list of the techniques that have been used to minimize thermal effects,
but instead to give an overview of the theoretical aspects underneath, and give
a state-of-the-art of the tools at the disposal of the laser scientist to
measure thermal effects. After a presentation of some general properties of
Yb-doped materials, we address the issue of evaluating the temperature map in
Yb-doped laser crystals, both theoretically and experimentally. This is the
first step before studying the complex problem of thermal lensing (part III).
We will focus on some newly discussed aspects, like the definition of the
thermo-optic coefficient: we will highlight some misleading interpretations of
thermal lensing experiments due to the use of the dn/dT parameter in a context
where it is not relevant. Part IV will be devoted to a state-of-the-art of
experimental techniques used to measure thermal lensing. Eventually, in part V,
we will give some concrete examples in Yb-doped materials, where their
peculiarities will be pointed out.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We present a numerical study and analytical model of the optical near-field
diffracted in the vicinity of subwavelength grooves milled in silver surfaces.
The Green's tensor approach permits computation of the phase and amplitude
dependence of the diffracted wave as a function of the groove geometry. It is
shown that the field diffracted along the interface by the groove is equivalent
to replacing the groove by an oscillating dipolar line source. An analytic
expression is derived from the Green's function formalism, that reproduces well
the asymptotic surface plasmon polariton (SPP) wave as well as the transient
surface wave in the near-zone close to the groove. The agreement between this
model and the full simulation is very good, showing that the transient
"near-zone" regime does not depend on the precise shape of the groove. Finally,
it is shown that a composite diffractive evanescent wave model that includes
the asymptotic SPP can describe the wavelength evolution in this transient
near-zone. Such a semi-analytical model may be useful for the design and
optimization of more elaborate photonic circuits whose behavior in large part
will be controlled by surface waves.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We calculate angle-resolved above-threshold ionization spectra for diatomic
molecules in linearly polarized laser fields, employing the strong-field
approximation. The interference structure resulting from the individual
contributions of the different scattering scenarios is discussed in detail,
with respect to the dependence on the internuclear distance and molecular
orientation. We show that, in general, the contributions from the processes in
which the electron is freed at one center and rescatters off the other obscure
the interference maxima and minima obtained from single-center processes.
However, around the boundary of the energy regions for which rescattering has a
classical counterpart, such processes play a negligible role and very clear
interference patterns are observed. In such energy regions, one is able to
infer the internuclear distance from the energy difference between adjacent
interference minima.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: When light is passing through a rotating medium the optical polarisation is
rotated. Recently it has been reasoned that this rotation applies also to the
transmitted image (Padgett et al. 2006). We examine these two phenomena by
extending an analysis of Player (1976) to general electromagnetic fields. We
find that in this more general case the wave equation inside the rotating
medium has to be amended by a term which is connected to the orbital angular
momentum of the light. We show that optical spin and orbital angular momentum
account respectively for the rotation of the polarisation and the rotation of
the transmitted image.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: We show that it can be considered some of Bach pitches series as a stochastic
process with scaling behavior. Using multifractal deterend fluctuation analysis
(MF-DFA) method, frequency series of Bach pitches have been analyzed. In this
view we find same second moment exponents (after double profiling) in ranges
(1.7-1.8) in his works. Comparing MF-DFA results of original series to those
for shuffled and surrogate series we can distinguish multifractality due to
long-range correlations and a broad probability density function. Finally we
determine the scaling exponents and singularity spectrum. We conclude fat tail
has more effect in its multifractality nature than long-range correlations.

Categories: stat.ME, physics.soc-ph, stat.AP
Abstract: The rich set of interactions between individuals in the society results in
complex community structure, capturing highly connected circles of friends,
families, or professional cliques in a social network. Thanks to frequent
changes in the activity and communication patterns of individuals, the
associated social and communication network is subject to constant evolution.
Our knowledge of the mechanisms governing the underlying community dynamics is
limited, but is essential for a deeper understanding of the development and
self-optimisation of the society as a whole. We have developed a new algorithm
based on clique percolation, that allows, for the first time, to investigate
the time dependence of overlapping communities on a large scale and as such, to
uncover basic relationships characterising community evolution. Our focus is on
networks capturing the collaboration between scientists and the calls between
mobile phone users. We find that large groups persist longer if they are
capable of dynamically altering their membership, suggesting that an ability to
change the composition results in better adaptability. The behaviour of small
groups displays the opposite tendency, the condition for stability being that
their composition remains unchanged. We also show that the knowledge of the
time commitment of the members to a given community can be used for estimating
the community's lifetime. These findings offer a new view on the fundamental
differences between the dynamics of small groups and large institutions.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, cond-mat.soft, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Extensions of statistical mechanics are routinely being used to infer free
energies from the work performed over single-molecule nonequilibrium
trajectories. A key element of this approach is the ubiquitous expression
dW/dt=\partial H(x,t)/ \partial t which connects the microscopic work W
performed by a time-dependent force on the coordinate x with the corresponding
Hamiltonian H(x,t) at time t. Here we show that this connection, as pivotal as
it is, cannot be used to estimate free energy changes. We discuss the
implications of this result for single-molecule experiments and atomistic
molecular simulations and point out possible avenues to overcome these
limitations.

Categories: q-fin.ST, cond-mat.other, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: To investigate the universality of the structure of interactions in different
markets, we analyze the cross-correlation matrix C of stock price fluctuations
in the National Stock Exchange (NSE) of India. We find that this emerging
market exhibits strong correlations in the movement of stock prices compared to
developed markets, such as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). This is shown to
be due to the dominant influence of a common market mode on the stock prices.
By comparison, interactions between related stocks, e.g., those belonging to
the same business sector, are much weaker. This lack of distinct sector
identity in emerging markets is explicitly shown by reconstructing the network
of mutually interacting stocks. Spectral analysis of C for NSE reveals that,
the few largest eigenvalues deviate from the bulk of the spectrum predicted by
random matrix theory, but they are far fewer in number compared to, e.g., NYSE.
We show this to be due to the relative weakness of intra-sector interactions
between stocks, compared to the market mode, by modeling stock price dynamics
with a two-factor model. Our results suggest that the emergence of an internal
structure comprising multiple groups of strongly coupled components is a
signature of market development.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: Particle in cell (PIC) simulations of collisionless magnetic reconnection are
presented that demonstrate that the electron dissipation region develops a
distinct two-scale structure along the outflow direction. The length of the
electron current layer is found to decrease with decreasing electron mass,
approaching the ion inertial length for a proton-electron plasma. A surprise,
however, is that the electrons form a high-velocity outflow jet that remains
decoupled from the magnetic field and extends large distances downstream from
the x-line. The rate of reconnection remains fast in very large systems,
independent of boundary conditions and the mass of electrons.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Mechanisms of whispering-gallery (WG) modes coupling in microdisk photonic
molecules (PMs) with slight and significant size mismatch are numerically
investigated. The results reveal two different scenarios of modes interaction
depending on the degree of this mismatch and offer new insight into how PM
parameters can be tuned to control and modify WG-modes wavelengths and
Q-factors. From a practical point of view, these findings offer a way to
fabricate PM microlaser structures that exhibit low thresholds and directional
emission, and at the same time are more tolerant to fabrication errors than
previously explored coupled-cavity structures composed of identical
microresonators.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: A new single-particle shell model is derived by solving the Schr\"odinger
equation for a semi-spheroidal potential well. Only the negative parity states
of the $Z(z)$ component of the wave function are allowed, so that new magic
numbers are obtained for oblate semi-spheroids, semi-sphere and prolate
semi-spheroids. The semi-spherical magic numbers are identical with those
obtained at the oblate spheroidal superdeformed shape: 2, 6, 14, 26, 44, 68,
100, 140, ... The superdeformed prolate magic numbers of the semi-spheroidal
shape are identical with those obtained at the spherical shape of the
spheroidal harmonic oscillator: 2, 8, 20, 40, 70, 112, 168 ...

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Influence of hole shape on extraordinary optical transmission was
investigated using hole arrays consisting of rectangular holes with different
aspect ratio. It was found that the transmission could be tuned continuously by
rotating the hole array. Further more, a phase was generated in this process,
and linear polarization states could be changed to elliptical polarization
states. This phase was correlated with the aspect ratio of the holes. An
intuitional model was presented to explain these results.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The intercombination line of Strontium at 689nm is successfully used in laser
cooling to reach the photon recoil limit with Doppler cooling in a
magneto-optical traps (MOT). In this paper we present a systematic study of the
loading efficiency of such a MOT. Comparing the experimental results to a
simple model allows us to discuss the actual limitation of our apparatus. We
also study in detail the final MOT regime emphasizing the role of gravity on
the position, size and temperature along the vertical and horizontal
directions. At large laser detuning, one finds an unusual situation where
cooling and trapping occur in the presence of a high bias magnetic field.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We demonstrate that radiative transitions with \Delta l = - 1 are strongly
dominating for all values of n and l, except small region where l << n.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: We are proposing to test experimentally the new idea of Enhanced Optical
Cooling (EOC) in an electron storage ring. This experiment will confirm new
fundamental processes in beam physics and will demonstrate new unique
possibilities with this cooling technique. It will open important applications
of EOC in nuclear physics, elementary particle physics and in Light Sources
(LS) based on high brightness electron and ion beams.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A new approach to non-extensive thermodynamical systems with non-additive
energy and entropy is proposed. The main idea of the paper is based on the
statistical matching of the thermodynamical systems with the additive
multi-step Markov chains. This general approach is applied to the Ising spin
chain with long-range interaction between its elements. The asymptotical
expressions for the energy and entropy of the system are derived for the
limiting case of weak interaction. These thermodynamical quantities are found
to be non-proportional to the length of the system (number of its particle).

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: For the 100 largest European universities we studied the statistical
properties of bibliometric indicators related to research performance, field
citation density and journal impact. We find a size-dependent cumulative
advantage for the impact of universities in terms of total number of citations.
In previous work a similar scaling rule was found at the level of research
groups. Therefore we conjecture that this scaling rule is a prevalent property
of the science system. We observe that lower performance universities have a
larger size-dependent cumulative advantage for receiving citations than
top-performance universities. We also find that for the lower-performance
universities the fraction of not-cited publications decreases considerably with
size. Generally, the higher the average journal impact of the publications of a
university, the lower the number of not-cited publications. We find that the
average research performance does not dilute with size. Large top-performance
universities succeed in keeping a high performance over a broad range of
activities. This most probably is an indication of their scientific attractive
power. Next we find that particularly for the lower-performance universities
the field citation density provides a strong cumulative advantage in citations
per publication. The relation between number of citations and field citation
density found in this study can be considered as a second basic scaling rule of
the science system. Top-performance universities publish in journals with
significantly higher journal impact as compared to the lower performance
universities. We find a significant decrease of the fraction of self-citations
with increasing research performance, average field citation density, and
average journal impact.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: For the first time we apply the methodologies of nonlinear analysis to
investigate atomic matter. We use these methods in the analysis of Atomic
Weights and of Mass Number of atomic nuclei. Using the AutoCorrelation Function
and Mutual Information we establish the presence of nonlinear effects in the
mechanism of increasing mass of atomic nuclei considered as a function of the
atomic number. We find that increasing mass is divergent, possibly chaotic. We
also investigate the possible existence of a Power Law for atomic nuclei and,
using also the technique of the variogram, we conclude that a fractal regime
could superintend to the mechanism of increasing mass for nuclei. Finally,
using the Hurst exponent, evidence is obtained that the mechanism of increasing
mass in atomic nuclei is in the fractional Brownian regime. The most
interesting results are obtained by using Recurrence Quantification Analysis
(RQA). New recurrences, psudoperiodicities, self-resemblance and class of
self-similarities are identified with values of determinism showing oscillating
values indicating the presence of more or less stability during the process of
increasing mass of atomic nuclei. In brief, new regimes of regularities are
identified for atomic nuclei that deserve to be studied by future researches.
In particular an accurate analysis of binding energy values by nonlinear
methods is further required.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present a detailed experimental and theoretical study of the effect of
nuclear spin on the performance of optical lattice clocks. With a state-mixing
theory including spin-orbit and hyperfine interactions, we describe the origin
of the $^1S_0$-$^3P_0$ clock transition and the differential g-factor between
the two clock states for alkaline-earth(-like) atoms, using $^{87}$Sr as an
example. Clock frequency shifts due to magnetic and optical fields are
discussed with an emphasis on those relating to nuclear structure. An
experimental determination of the differential g-factor in $^{87}$Sr is
performed and is in good agreement with theory. The magnitude of the tensor
light shift on the clock states is also explored experimentally. State specific
measurements with controlled nuclear spin polarization are discussed as a
method to reduce the nuclear spin-related systematic effects to below
10$^{-17}$ in lattice clocks.

Categories: math.AP, math-ph, math.MP, physics.optics
Abstract: Cloaking devices are prescriptions of electrostatic, optical or
electromagnetic parameter fields (conductivity $\sigma(x)$, index of refraction
$n(x)$, or electric permittivity $\epsilon(x)$ and magnetic permeability
$\mu(x)$) which are piecewise smooth on $\mathbb R^3$ and singular on a
hypersurface $\Sigma$, and such that objects in the region enclosed by $\Sigma$
are not detectable to external observation by waves. Here, we give related
constructions of invisible tunnels, which allow electromagnetic waves to pass
between possibly distant points, but with only the ends of the tunnels visible
to electromagnetic imaging. Effectively, these change the topology of space
with respect to solutions of Maxwell's equations, corresponding to attaching a
handlebody to $\mathbb R^3$. The resulting devices thus function as
electromagnetic wormholes.

Categories: physics.hist-ph
Abstract: The historical significance of the problem of relativistic rigid rotation is
reviewed in light of recently published correspondence between Einstein and the
mathematician Vladimir Varicak from the years 1909 to 1913.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, astro-ph
Abstract: Einstein's early calculations of gravitational lensing, contained in a
scratch notebook and dated to the spring of 1912, are reexamined. A hitherto
unknown letter by Einstein suggests that he entertained the idea of explaining
the phenomenon of new stars by gravitational lensing in the fall of 1915 much
more seriously than was previously assumed. A reexamination of the relevant
calculations by Einstein shows that, indeed, at least some of them most likely
date from early October 1915. But in support of earlier historical
interpretation of Einstein's notes, it is argued that the appearance of Nova
Geminorum 1912 (DN Gem) in March 1912 may, in fact, provide a relevant context
and motivation for Einstein's lensing calculations on the occasion of his first
meeting with Erwin Freundlich during a visit in Berlin in April 1912. We also
comment on the significance of Einstein's consideration of gravitational
lensing in the fall of 1915 for the reconstruction of Einstein's final steps in
his path towards general relativity.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The assumption of the capture by the Solar System of the electrically charged
Planckian DM objects (daemons) from the galactic disk is confirmed not only by
the St.Petersburg (SPb) experiments detecting particles with V<30 km/s. Here
the daemon approach is analyzed considering the positive model independent
result of the DAMA/NaI experiment. We explain the maximum in DAMA signals
observed in the May-June period to be associated with the formation behind the
Sun of a trail of daemons that the Sun captures into elongated orbits as it
moves to the apex. The range of significant 2-6-keV DAMA signals fits well the
iodine nuclei elastically knocked out of the NaI(Tl) scintillator by particles
falling on the Earth with V=30-50 km/s from strongly elongated heliocentric
orbits. The half-year periodicity of the slower daemons observed in SPb
originates from the transfer of particles that are deflected through ~90 deg
into near-Earth orbits each time the particles cross the outer reaches of the
Sun which had captured them. Their multi-loop (cross-like) trajectories
traverse many times the Earth's orbit in March and September, which increases
the probability for the particles to enter near-Earth orbits during this time.
Corroboration of celestial mechanics calculations with observations yields
~1e-19 cm2 for the cross section of daemon interaction with the solar matter.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We describe a practical procedure for extracting the spatial structure and
the growth rates of slow eigenmodes of a spatially extended system, using a
unique experimental capability both to impose and to perturb desired initial
states. The procedure is used to construct experimentally the spectrum of
linear modes near the secondary instability boundary in Rayleigh-B\'{e}nard
convection. This technique suggests an approach to experimental
characterization of more complex dynamical states such as periodic orbits or
spatiotemporal chaos.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: We have studied the effect of annealing temperature on the statistical
properties of $WO_3$ surface using atomic force microscopy techniques (AFM). We
have applied both level crossing and structure function methods. Level crossing
analysis indicates an optimum annealing temperature of around 400$^oC$ at which
the effective area of the $WO_3$ thin film is maximum, whereas composition of
the surface remains stoichiometric. The complexity of the height fluctuation of
surfaces was characterized by roughness, roughness exponent and lateral size of
surface features. We have found that there is a phase transition at around
400$^oC$ from one set to two sets of roughness parameters. This happens due to
microstructural changes from amorphous to crystalline structure in the samples
that has been already found experimentally.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: The effect of bias voltages on the statistical properties of rough surfaces
has been studied using atomic force microscopy technique and its stochastic
analysis. We have characterized the complexity of the height fluctuation of a
rough surface by the stochastic parameters such as roughness exponent, level
crossing, and drift and diffusion coefficients as a function of the applied
bias voltage. It is shown that these statistical as well as microstructural
parameters can also explain the macroscopic property of a surface. Furthermore,
the tip convolution effect on the stochastic parameters has been examined.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: The effect of etching time scale of glass surface on its statistical
properties has been studied using atomic force microscopy technique. We have
characterized the complexity of the height fluctuation of a etched surface by
the stochastic parameters such as intermittency exponents, roughness, roughness
exponents, drift and diffusion coefficients and find their variations in terms
of the etching time.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The cosmological redshift phenomenon can be described by the dark matter
field fluid model, the results deduced from this model agree very well with the
observations. The observed cosmological redshift of light depends on both the
speed of the emitter and the distance between the emitter and the observer. If
the emitter moves away from us, a redshift is observed. If the emitter moves
towards us, whether a redshift, a blueshift or no shift is observed will depend
on the speed vs. the distance. If the speed is in the range of
c(exp[-beta*D]-1) < v < 0, a redshift is observed; if the speed equals
c(exp[-beta*D]-1), no shift is observed; if the speed v less than
c(exp[-beta*D]-1), a blueshift is observed. A redshift will be always observed
in all directions for any celestial objects as long as their distance from us
is large enough. Therefore, many more redshifts than blueshifts should be
observed for galaxies and supernovae, etc in the sky. This conclusion agrees
with current observations. The estimated value of the redshift constant beta of
the dark matter field fluid is in the range of 10^(-3) ~ 10^(-5)/Mpc. A large
redshift value from a distant celestial object may not necessarily indicate
that it has a large receding speed. Based on the redshift effect of dark matter
field fluid, it is concluded that at least in time average all photons have the
same geometry (size and shape) in all inertial reference frames and do not have
length contraction effect.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Role of axiom of choice in quantum measurement is highlighted by suggesting
that the conscious observer chooses the outcome from a mixed state. Further, in
a periodically repeating universe, these outcomes must be pre-recorded within
the non-physical conscious observers, which precludes free will. Free will
however exists in a universe with open time, It is suggested that psychology's
binding problem is connected with Cantor's original definition of set.
Influence of consciousness on material outcome through quantum processes is
discussed and interesting constraints derived. For example, it is predicted
that quantum mechanical brain states should get frozen if monitored at
sufficiently small space-time intervals - a neuro-biological version of the so
called quantum zeno effect, which has been verified in domain of micro-physics.
Existence of a very small micro-mini-black-hole in brain is predicted as a
space-time structural interface between consciousness and brain, whose
vaporization explains mass-loss reported in weighing experiments, conducting
during the moments of death.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We analyse the dependence of stock return cross-correlations on the sampling
frequency of the data known as the Epps effect: For high resolution data the
cross-correlations are significantly smaller than their asymptotic value as
observed on daily data. The former description implies that changing trading
frequency should alter the characteristic time of the phenomenon. This is not
true for the empirical data: The Epps curves do not scale with market activity.
The latter result indicates that the time scale of the phenomenon is connected
to the reaction time of market participants (this we denote as human time
scale), independent of market activity. In this paper we give a new description
of the Epps effect through the decomposition of cross-correlations. After
testing our method on a model of generated random walk price changes we justify
our analytical results by fitting the Epps curves of real world data.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Human beings like to believe they are in control of their destiny. This
ubiquitous trait seems to increase motivation and persistence, and is probably
evolutionarily adaptive. But how good really is our ability to control? How
successful is our track record in these areas? There is little understanding of
when and under what circumstances we may over-estimate or even lose our ability
to control and optimize outcomes, especially when they are the result of
aggregations of individual optimization processes. Here, we demonstrate
analytically using the theory of Markov Chains and by numerical simulations in
two classes of games, the Minority game and the Parrondo Games, that agents who
optimize their strategy based on past information actually perform worse than
non-optimizing agents. In other words, low-entropy (more informative)
strategies under-perform high-entropy (or random) strategies. This provides a
precise definition of the "illusion of control" in set-ups a priori defined to
emphasize the importance of optimization.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Analysis of electromagnetic planewave propagation in a medium which is a
spatiotemporally homogeneous, temporally nonlocal, isotropic, chiral medium in
a co-moving frame of reference shows that the medium is both spatially and
temporally nonlocal with respect to all non-co-moving inertial frames of
reference. Using the Lorentz transformations of electric and magnetic fields,
we show that plane waves which have positive phase velocity in the co-moving
frame of reference can have negative phase velocity in certain non-co-moving
frames of reference. Similarly, plane waves which have negative phase velocity
in the co-moving frame can have positive phase velocity in certain
non-co-moving frames.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Extending physics/0701092, a light source of monochromatic radiation, in
rectilinear motion under constant proper acceleration, passes near an observer
at rest. In the context of special relativity, we describe the observed Doppler
effect. We describe also the interesting discontinuous effect when riding
through occurs. An English version of this article is available.
  -----
  Da^urigante physics/0701092, luma fonto de unukolora radiado ^ce rekta movo
^ce konstanta propra akcelo pasas preter restanta observanto. ^Ce la
special-relativeco, ni priskribas la observatan Doppleran efikon. Ni anka^u
priskribas la interesan nekontinuan efikon se trapaso okazas.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.med-ph
Abstract: Elastic light scattering by mature red blood cells (RBCs) was theoretically
and experimentally analyzed with the discrete dipole approximation (DDA) and
the scanning flow cytometry (SFC), respectively. SFC permits measurement of
angular dependence of light-scattering intensity (indicatrix) of single
particles. A mature RBC is modeled as a biconcave disk in DDA simulations of
light scattering. We have studied the effect of RBC orientation related to the
direction of the incident light upon the indicatrix. Numerical calculations of
indicatrices for several aspect ratios and volumes of RBC have been carried
out. Comparison of the simulated indicatrices and indicatrices measured by SFC
showed good agreement, validating the biconcave disk model for a mature RBC. We
simulated the light-scattering output signals from the SFC with the DDA for
RBCs modeled as a disk-sphere and as an oblate spheroid. The biconcave disk,
the disk-sphere, and the oblate spheroid models have been compared for two
orientations, i.e. face-on and rim-on incidence. Only the oblate spheroid model
for rim-on incidence gives results similar to the rigorous biconcave disk
model.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: I discuss several aspects of information theory and its relationship to
physics and neuroscience. The unifying thread of this somewhat chaotic essay is
the concept of Kolmogorov or algorithmic complexity (Kolmogorov Complexity, for
short). I argue that it is natural to interpret cognition as the art of finding
algorithms that apprach the Solomonoff-Kolmogorov-Chaitin (algorithmic)
Complexity limit with appropriate tradeoffs. In addition, I claim that what we
call the universe is an interpreted abstraction--a mental construct--based on
the observed coherence between multiple sensory input streams and our own
interactions. Hence, the notion of Universe is itself a model.

Categories: cs.CY, cs.IR, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The subject of collective attention is central to an information age where
millions of people are inundated with daily messages. It is thus of interest to
understand how attention to novel items propagates and eventually fades among
large populations. We have analyzed the dynamics of collective attention among
one million users of an interactive website -- \texttt{digg.com} -- devoted to
thousands of novel news stories. The observations can be described by a
dynamical model characterized by a single novelty factor. Our measurements
indicate that novelty within groups decays with a stretched-exponential law,
suggesting the existence of a natural time scale over which attention fades.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: A cylindrical wave expansion method is developed to obtain the scattering
field for an ideal two-dimensional cylindrical invisibility cloak. A near-ideal
model of the invisibility cloak is set up to solve the boundary problem at the
inner boundary of the cloak shell. We confirm that a cloak with the ideal
material parameters is a perfect invisibility cloak by systematically studying
the change of the scattering coefficients from the near-ideal case to the ideal
one. However, due to the slow convergence of the zero$^{th}$ order scattering
coefficients, a tiny perturbation on the cloak would induce a noticeable field
scattering and penetration.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Phase singularities as topological objects of wave fields appear in a variety
of physical, chemical, and biological scenarios. In this paper, by making use
of the $\phi$-mapping topological current theory, we study the topological
properties of the phase singularities in two and three dimensional space in
details. The topological inner structure of the phase singularities are
obtained, and the topological charge of the phase singularities are expressed
by the topological numbers: Hopf indices and Brouwer degrees. Furthermore, the
topological invariant of the closed and knotted phase singularities in three
dimensional space are also discussed in details.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Carrier wave shocking is studied using the Pseudo-Spectral Spatial Domain
(PSSD) technique. We describe the shock detection diagnostics necessary for
this numerical study, and verify them against theoretical shocking predictions
for the dispersionless case. These predictions show Carrier Envelope Phase
(CEP) and pulse bandwidth sensitivity in the single-cycle regime. The flexible
dispersion management offered by PSSD enables us to independently control the
linear and nonlinear dispersion. Customized dispersion profiles allow us to
analyze the development of both carrier self-steepening and shocks. The results
exhibit a marked asymmetry between normal and anomalous dispersion, both in the
limits of the shocking regime and in the (near) shocked pulse waveforms.
Combining these insights, we offer some suggestions on how carrier shocking (or
at least extreme self-steepening) might be realised experimentally.

Categories: q-fin.GN, cond-mat.dis-nn, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The large-scale organization of the world economies is exhibiting
increasingly levels of local heterogeneity and global interdependency.
Understanding the relation between local and global features calls for
analytical tools able to uncover the global emerging organization of the
international trade network. Here we analyze the world network of bilateral
trade imbalances and characterize its overall flux organization, unraveling
local and global high-flux pathways that define the backbone of the trade
system. We develop a general procedure capable to progressively filter out in a
consistent and quantitative way the dominant trade channels. This procedure is
completely general and can be applied to any weighted network to detect the
underlying structure of transport flows. The trade fluxes properties of the
world trade web determines a ranking of trade partnerships that highlights
global interdependencies, providing information not accessible by simple local
analysis. The present work provides new quantitative tools for a dynamical
approach to the propagation of economic crises.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, nlin.CD
Abstract: We present numerical studies for finitely extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE)
dumbbells which are dispersed in a turbulent plane shear flow at moderate
Reynolds number. The polymer ensemble is described on the mesoscopic level by a
set of stochastic ordinary differential equations with Brownian noise. The
dynamics of the Newtonian solvent is determined by the Navier-Stokes equations.
Momentum transfer of the dumbbells with the solvent is implemented by an
additional volume forcing term in the Navier-Stokes equations, such that both
components of the resulting viscoelastic fluid are connected by a two-way
coupling. The dynamics of the dumbbells is given then by Newton's second law of
motion including small inertia effects. We investigate the dynamics of the flow
for different degrees of dumbbell elasticity and inertia, as given by
Weissenberg and Stokes numbers, respectively. For the parameters accessible in
our study, the magnitude of the feedback of the polymers on the macroscopic
properties of turbulence remains small as quantified by the global energy
budget and the Reynolds stresses. A reduction of the turbulent drag by up to
20% is observed for the larger particle inertia. The angular statistics of the
dumbbells shows an increasing alignment with the mean flow direction for both,
increasing elasticity and inertia. This goes in line with a growing asymmetry
of the probability density function of the transverse derivative of the
streamwise turbulent velocity component. We find that dumbbells get stretched
referentially in regions where vortex stretching or bi-axial strain dominate
the local dynamics and topology of the velocity gradient tensor.

Categories: physics.data-an, cond-mat.other, nlin.CD, nucl-th
Abstract: A random matrix model to describe the coupling of m-fold symmetry in
constructed. The particular threefold case is used to analyze data on
eigenfrequencies of elastomechanical vibration of an anisotropic quartz block.
It is suggested that such experimental/theoretical study may supply powerful
means to discern intrinsic symmetries in physical systems.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We demonstrate an all-optical delay line in hot cesium vapor that tunably
delays 275 ps input pulses up to 6.8 ns and 740 input ps pulses up to 59 ns
(group index of approximately 200) with little pulse distortion. The delay is
made tunable with a fast reconfiguration time (hundreds of ns) by optically
pumping out of the atomic ground states.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Systematic error in calculation of z for high redshift type Ia supernovae
could help explain unexpected luminosity values that indicate an accelerating
rate of expansion of the universe.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We show that full-image micro-PIV analysis in combination with images of
transient particle motion is a powerful tool for experimental studies of
acoustic radiation forces and acoustic streaming in microfluidic chambers under
piezo-actuation in the MHz range. The measured steady-state motion of both
large 5 um and small 1 um particles can be understood in terms of the acoustic
eigenmodes or standing ultra-sound waves in the given experimental
microsystems. This interpretation is supported by numerical solutions of the
corresponding acoustic wave equation.

Categories: physics.ed-ph
Abstract: This paper introduces a theory about the role of language in learning
physics. The theory is developed in the context of physics students' and
physicists' talking and writing about the subject of quantum mechanics. We
found that physicists' language encodes different varieties of analogical
models through the use of grammar and conceptual metaphor. We hypothesize that
students categorize concepts into ontological categories based on the
grammatical structure of physicists' language. We also hypothesize that
students over-extend and misapply conceptual metaphors in physicists' speech
and writing. Using our theory, we will show how, in some cases, we can explain
student difficulties in quantum mechanics as difficulties with language.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Microfluidic chips have been fabricated to study electrokinetic pumping
generated by a low voltage AC signal applied to an asymmetric electrode array.
A measurement procedure has been established and followed carefully resulting
in a high degree of reproducibility of the measurements. Depending on the ionic
concentration as well as the amplitude of the applied voltage, the observed
direction of the DC flow component is either forward or reverse. The impedance
spectrum has been thoroughly measured and analyzed in terms of an equivalent
circuit diagram. Our observations agree qualitatively, but not quantitatively,
with theoretical models published in the literature.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this letter I suggest possible redefinition of mass density, not depending
on speed of the mass element, which leads to a more simple stress-energy for an
object. I calculate energy of black hole.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: A set of analog electronics boards for serial readout of silicon strip
sensors was fabricated. A commercially available amplifier is mounted on a
homemade hybrid board in order to receive analog signals from silicon strip
sensors. Also, another homemade circuit board is fabricated in order to
translate amplifier control signals into a suitable format and to provide bias
voltage to the amplifier as well as to the silicon sensors. We discuss
technical details of the fabrication process and performance of the circuit
boards we developed.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In this paper, we consider daily financial data of a collection of different
stock market indices, exchange rates, and interest rates, and we analyze their
multi-scaling properties by estimating a simple specification of the
Markov-switching multifractal model (MSM). In order to see how well the
estimated models capture the temporal dependence of the data, we estimate and
compare the scaling exponents $H(q)$ (for $q = 1, 2$) for both empirical data
and simulated data of the estimated MSM models. In most cases the multifractal
model appears to generate `apparent' long memory in agreement with the
empirical scaling laws.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.atm-clus, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: An accurate experimental investigation on the Mpemba effect (that is, the
freezing of initially hot water before cold one) is carried out, showing that
in the adiabatic cooling of water a relevant role is played by supercooling as
well as by phase transitions taking place at 6 +/- 1 oC, 3.5 +/- 0.5 oC and 1.3
+/- 0.6 oC, respectively. The last transition, occurring with a non negligible
probability of 0.21, has not been detected earlier. Supported by the
experimental results achieved, a thorough theoretical analysis of supercooling
and such phase transitions, which are interpreted in terms of different
ordering of clusters of molecules in water, is given.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We investigate the possibility to deduce momentum space properties from
time-dependent density functional calculations. Electron and ion momentum
distributions after double ionization of a model Helium atom in a strong
few-cycle laser pulse are studied. We show that, in this case, the choice of
suitable functionals for the observables is considerably more important than
the choice of the correlation potential in the time-dependent Kohn-Sham
equations. By comparison with the solution of the time-dependent Schroedinger
equation, the insufficiency of functionals neglecting electron correlation is
demonstrated. We construct a functional of the Kohn-Sham orbitals, which in
principle yields the exact momentum distributions of the electrons and the ion.
The product-phase approximation is introduced, which reduces the problem of
approximating this functional significantly.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Star patterns, reminiscent of a wide range of diffusively controlled growth
forms from snowflakes to Saffman-Taylor fingers, are ubiquitous features of ice
covered lakes. Despite the commonality and beauty of these ``lake stars'' the
underlying physical processes that produce them have not been explained in a
coherent theoretical framework. Here we describe a simple mathematical model
that captures the principal features of lake-star formation; radial fingers of
(relatively warm) water-rich regions grow from a central source and evolve
through a competition between thermal and porous media flow effects in a
saturated snow layer covering the lake. The number of star arms emerges from a
stability analysis of this competition and the qualitative features of this
meter-scale natural phenomena are captured in laboratory experiments.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: We put forward an approach to estimate the amount of bipartite spatial
entanglement of down-converted photon states correlated in orbital angular
momentum and the magnitude of the transverse (radial) wave vectors. Both
degrees of freedom are properly considered in our framework, which only
requires azimuthal local linear optical transformations and mode selection
analysis with two fiber detectors. The coincidence distributions predicted by
our approach give an excellent fit to the distributions measured in a recent
experiment aimed to show the very high-dimensional transverse entanglement of
twin photons from a down-conversion source. Our estimate for the Schmidt number
is substantially lower but still confirms the presence of high-dimensional
entanglement.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We report the suppression of loss of surface plasmon polariton propagating at
the interface between silver film and optically pumped polymer with dye. Large
magnitude of the effect enables a variety of applications of "active"
nanoplasmonics. The experimental study is accompanied by the development of the
analytical description of the phenomenon and the solution of the controversy
regarding the direction of the wavevector of a wave with a strong evanescent
component in an active medium.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The Special Theory of Relativity and the Theory of the Electron have had an
interesting history together. Originally the electron was studied in a non
relativistic context and this opened up the interesting possibility that lead
to the conclusion that the mass of the electron could be thought of entirely in
electromagnetic terms without introducing inertial considerations. However the
application of Special Relativity lead to several problems, both for an
extended electron and the point electron. These inconsistencies have, contrary
to popular belief not been resolved satisfactorily today, even within the
context of Quantum Theory. Nevertheless these and subsequent studies bring out
the interesting result that Special Relativity breaks down within the Compton
scale or when the Compton scale is not neglected. This again runs contrary to
an uncritical notion that Special Relativity is valid for point particles.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, cond-mat.dis-nn, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We consider the ferromagnetic large-$q$ state Potts model in complex evolving
networks, which is equivalent to an optimal cooperation problem, in which the
agents try to optimize the total sum of pair cooperation benefits and the
supports of independent projects. The agents are found to be typically of two
kinds: a fraction of $m$ (being the magnetization of the Potts model) belongs
to a large cooperating cluster, whereas the others are isolated one man's
projects. It is shown rigorously that the homogeneous model has a strongly
first-order phase transition, which turns to second-order for random
interactions (benefits), the properties of which are studied numerically on the
Barab\'asi-Albert network. The distribution of finite-size transition points is
characterized by a shift exponent, $1/\tilde{\nu}'=.26(1)$, and by a different
width exponent, $1/\nu'=.18(1)$, whereas the magnetization at the transition
point scales with the size of the network, $N$, as: $m\sim N^{-x}$, with
$x=.66(1)$.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, nucl-th
Abstract: The spectral function of the closed-shell Neon atom is computed by expanding
the electron self-energy through a set of Faddeev equations. This method
describes the coupling of single-particle degrees of freedom with correlated
two-electron, two-hole, and electron-hole pairs. The excitation spectra are
obtained using the Random Phase Approximation, rather than the Tamm-Dancoff
framework employed in the third-order algebraic diagrammatic contruction
[ADC(3)] method. The difference between these two approaches is studied, as
well as the interplay between ladder and ring diagrams in the self-energy.
Satisfactory results are obtained for the ionization energies as well as the
energy of the ground state with the Faddeev-RPA scheme that is also appropriate
for the high-density electron gas.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, cond-mat.soft, q-bio.BM
Abstract: We propose a combined experimental (Atomic Force Microscopy) and theoretical
study of the structural and dynamical properties of nucleosomes. In contrast to
biochemical approaches, this method allows to determine simultaneously the DNA
complexed length distribution and nucleosome position in various contexts.
First, we show that differences in the nucleo-proteic structure observed
between conventional H2A and H2A.Bbd variant nucleosomes induce quantitative
changes in the in the length distribution of DNA complexed with histones. Then,
the sliding action of remodeling complex SWI/SNF is characterized through the
evolution of the nucleosome position and wrapped DNA length mapping. Using a
linear energetic model for the distribution of DNA complexed length, we extract
the net wrapping energy of DNA onto the histone octamer, and compare it to
previous studies.

Categories: physics.atm-clus, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Density-functional theory has been applied to investigate systematics of
sodium clusters Na_n in the size range of n= 39-55. A clear evolutionary trend
in the growth of their ground-state geometries emerges. The clusters at the
beginning of the series (n=39-43) are symmetric and have partial icosahedral
(two-shell) structure. The growth then goes through a series of disordered
clusters (n=44-52) where the icosahedral core is lost. However, for n>52 a
three shell icosahedral structure emerges. This change in the nature of the
geometry is abrupt. In addition, density-functional molecular dynamics has been
used to calculate the specific heat curves for the representative sizes n= 43,
45, 48 and 52. These results along with already available thermodynamic
calculations for n= 40, 50, and 55 enable us to carry out a detailed comparison
of the heat capacity curves with their respective geometries for the entire
series. Our results clearly bring out strong correlation between the evolution
of the geometries and the nature of the shape of the heat capacities. The
results also firmly establish the size-sensitive nature of the heat capacities
in sodium clusters.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech
Abstract: A new public conveyance model applicable to buses and trains is proposed in
this paper by using stochastic cellular automaton. We have found the optimal
density of vehicles, at which the average velocity becomes maximum,
significantly depends on the number of stops and passengers behavior of getting
on a vehicle at stops. The efficiency of the hail-and-ride system is also
discussed by comparing the different behavior of passengers. Moreover, we have
found that a big cluster of vehicles is divided into small clusters, by
incorporating information of the number of vehicles between successive stops.

Categories: math.NA, math-ph, math.MP, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A library of C functions yielding exact solutions of potential and flux
influences due to uniform surface distribution of singularities on flat
triangular and rectangular elements has been developed. This library, ISLES,
has been used to develop the neBEM solver that is both precise and fast in
solving a wide range of problems of scientific and technological interest. Here
we present the exact expressions proposed for computing the influence of
uniform singularity distributions on triangular elements and illustrate their
accuracy. We also present a study concerning the time taken to evaluate these
long and complicated expressions \textit{vis a vis} that spent in carrying out
simple quadratures. Finally, we solve a classic benchmark problem in
electrostatics, namely, estimation of the capacitance of a unit square plate
raised to unit volt. For this problem, we present the estimated values of
capacitance and compare them successfully with some of the most accurate
results available in the literature. In addition, we present the variation of
the charge density close to the corner of the plate for various degrees of
discretization. The variations are found to be smooth and converging. This is
in clear contrast to the criticism commonly leveled against usual BEM solvers.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Retarded electromagnetic potentials are derived from Maxwell's equations and
the Lorenz condition. The difference found between these potentials and the
conventional Li\'{e}nard-Wiechert ones is explained by neglect, for the latter,
of the motion-dependence of the effective charge density. The corresponding
retarded fields of a point-like charge in arbitary motion are compared with
those given by the formulae of Heaviside, Feynman, Jefimenko and other authors.
The fields of an accelerated charge given by the Feynman are the same as those
derived from the Li\'{e}nard-Wiechert potentials but not those given by the
Jefimenko formulae. A mathematical error concerning partial space and time
derivatives in the derivation of the Jefimenko equations is pointed out.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We report that resonant response with a very high quality factor can be
achieved in a planar metamaterial by introducing symmetry breaking in the shape
of its structural elements, which enables excitation of dark modes, i.e. modes
that are weakly coupled to free space.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.other, physics.optics
Abstract: We study Gaussian valence bond states of continuous variable systems,
obtained as the outputs of projection operations from an ancillary space of M
infinitely entangled bonds connecting neighboring sites, applied at each of $N$
sites of an harmonic chain. The entanglement distribution in Gaussian valence
bond states can be controlled by varying the input amount of entanglement
engineered in a (2M+1)-mode Gaussian state known as the building block, which
is isomorphic to the projector applied at a given site. We show how this
mechanism can be interpreted in terms of multiple entanglement swapping from
the chain of ancillary bonds, through the building blocks. We provide optical
schemes to produce bisymmetric three-mode Gaussian building blocks (which
correspond to a single bond, M=1), and study the entanglement structure in the
output Gaussian valence bond states. The usefulness of such states for quantum
communication protocols with continuous variables, like telecloning and
teleportation networks, is finally discussed.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We introduce an immunization method where the percentage of required
vaccinations for immunity are close to the optimal value of a targeted
immunization scheme of highest degree nodes. Our strategy retains the advantage
of being purely local, without the need of knowledge on the global network
structure or identification of the highest degree nodes. The method consists of
selecting a random node and asking for a neighbor that has more links than
himself or more than a given threshold and immunizing him. We compare this
method to other efficient strategies on three real social networks and on a
scale-free network model, and find it to be significantly more effective.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The evolution of Turkish Journal of Chemistry (Turk J. Chem) Hirsch index
(h-index) over the period 1995-2005 is studied and determined in the case of
the self and without self-citations. It is seen that the effect of Hirsch index
of Turk J. Chem has a highly positive trend during the last five years. It
proves that Turk J. Chem is improving itself both in quantity and quality since
h-index reflects peer review, and peer review reflects research quality of a
journal.

Categories: physics.space-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We present Cluster measurements of large electric fields correlated with
intense downward field-aligned currents, and show that the data can be
reproduced by a simple model of ionospheric plasma depletion caused by the
currents. This type of magnetosphere-ionosphere interaction may be important
when considering the mapping between these two regions of space.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Among the ideas to be conveyed to students in an introductory quantum course,
we have the pivotal idea championed by Dirac that functions correspond to
column vectors (kets) and that differential operators correspond to matrices
(ket-bras) acting on those vectors. The MATLAB (matrix-laboratory) programming
environment is especially useful in conveying these concepts to students
because it is geared towards the type of matrix manipulations useful in solving
introductory quantum physics problems. In this article, we share MATLAB codes
which have been developed at WPI, focusing on 1D problems, to be used in
conjunction with Griffiths' introductory text.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: Planetary topography can either be modeled as a load supported by the
lithosphere, or as a dynamical effect due to lithospheric flexure caused by
mantle convection. In both cases the response of the lithosphere to external
forces can be calculated with the theory of thin elastic plates or shells. On
one-plate planets the spherical geometry of the lithospheric shell plays an
important role in the flexure mechanism. So far the equations governing the
deformations and stresses of a spherical shell have only been derived under the
assumption of a shell of constant thickness. However local studies of gravity
and topography data suggest large variations in the thickness of the
lithosphere. In this article we obtain the scalar flexure equations governing
the deformations of a thin spherical shell with variable thickness or variable
Young's modulus. The resulting equations can be solved in succession, except
for a system of two simultaneous equations, the solutions of which are the
transverse deflection and an associated stress function. In order to include
bottom loading generated by mantle convection, we extend the method of stress
functions to include loads with a toroidal tangential component. We further
show that toroidal tangential displacement always occurs if the shell thickness
varies, even in the absence of toroidal loads. We finally prove that the
degree-one harmonic components of the transverse deflection and of the toroidal
tangential displacement are independent of the elastic properties of the shell
and are associated with translational and rotational freedom. The flexure
equations for a shell of variable thickness are useful not only for the
prediction of the gravity signal in local admittance studies, but also for the
construction of stress maps in tectonic analysis.

Categories: cond-mat.other, physics.atom-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: It is shown that fermionic polar molecules or atoms in a bilayer optical
lattice can undergo the transition to a state with circulating currents, which
spontaneously breaks the time reversal symmetry. Estimates of relevant
temperature scales are given and experimental signatures of the circulating
current phase are identified. Related phenomena in bosonic and spin systems
with ring exchange are discussed.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The design, construction, and performance of a linear radio-frequency ion
trap (RFQ) intended for use in the Enriched Xenon Observatory (EXO) are
described. EXO aims to detect the neutrinoless double-beta decay of $^{136}$Xe
to $^{136}$Ba. To suppress possible backgrounds EXO will complement the
measurement of decay energy and, to some extent, topology of candidate events
in a Xe filled detector with the identification of the daughter nucleus
($^{136}$Ba). The ion trap described here is capable of accepting, cooling, and
confining individual Ba ions extracted from the site of the candidate
double-beta decay event. A single trapped ion can then be identified, with a
large signal-to-noise ratio, via laser spectroscopy.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is shown that a gravitationally collapsing black hole acts as an ultrahigh
energy particle accelerator that can accelerate particles to energies
inconceivable in any terrestrial particle accelerator, and that when the energy
E of the particles comprising the matter in the black hole is $ \sim 10^{2} $
GeV or more,or equivalently the temperature T is $ \sim 10^{15}$ K or more, the
entire matter in the black hole will be in the form of quark-gluon plasma
permeated by leptons.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A critique of the singularity theorems of Penrose, Hawking, and Geroch is
given. It is pointed out that a gravitationally collapsing black hole acts as
an ultrahigh energy particle accelerator that can accelerate particles to
energies inconceivable in any terrestrial particle accelerator, and that when
the energy $E$ of the particles comprising matter in a black hole is $\sim
10^{2} GeV$ or more, or equivalently, the temperature $T$ is $\sim 10^{15} K$
or more, the entire matter in the black hole is converted into quark-gluon
plasma permeated by leptons. As quarks and leptons are fermions, it is
emphasized that the collapse of a black-hole to a space-time singularity is
inhibited by Pauli's exclusion principle. It is also suggested that ultimately
a black hole may end up either as a stable quark star, or as a pulsating quark
star which may be a source of gravitational radiation, or it may simply explode
with a mini bang of a sort.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We argue about a possible scenario of physical reality based on the
parallelism between Poincare group and the sunyata philosophy of Nagarjuna. The
notion of "relational" is the common denominator of two views. We have
approached the relational concept in third-person perspective (ontic level). It
is possible to deduce different physical consequence and interpretation through
first-person perspective approach. This relational interpretation leave open
the questions: i)we must abandon the idea for a physical system the possibility
to extract completeness information? ii)we must abandon the idea to infer a
possible structure of physical reality?

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We propose a new theoretical method for the calculation of the interaction
energy between macromolecular systems at large distances. The method provides a
linear scaling of the computing time with the system size and is considered as
an alternative to the well known fast multipole method. Its efficiency,
accuracy and applicability to macromolecular systems is analyzed and discussed
in detail.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We use numerical optimization to study the properties of (1) the class of
one-dimensional potential energy functions and (2) systems of point charges in
two-dimensions that yield the largest hyperpolarizabilities, which we find to
be within 30% of the fundamental limit. We investigate the character of the
potential energy functions and resulting wavefunctions and find that a broad
range of potentials yield the same intrinsic hyperpolarizability ceiling of
0.709.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Many real systems possess accelerating statistics where the total number of
edges grows faster than the network size. In this paper, we propose a simple
weighted network model with accelerating growth. We derive analytical
expressions for the evolutions and distributions for strength, degree, and
weight, which are relevant to accelerating growth. We also find that
accelerating growth determines the clustering coefficient of the networks.
Interestingly, the distributions for strength, degree, and weight display a
transition from scale-free to exponential form when the parameter with respect
to accelerating growth increases from a small to large value. All the
theoretical predictions are successfully contrasted with extensive numerical
simulations.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We develop a class of soliton solution of {\it linear} Schr\"odinger equation
without external potential. The quantum probability density generates its own
boundary inside which there is internal vibration whose wave number is
determined by the velocity of the particle as firstly conjectured by de
Broglie. Assuming resonance of the internal vibration will lead to quantization
of particle's momentum in term of wave number of the envelope quantum
probability density. We further show that the linearity of the Schr\"odinger
equation allows us to have non-interacting many solitons solution through
superposition, each describing a particle with equal mass.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Prices of commodities or assets produce what is called time-series. Different
kinds of financial time-series have been recorded and studied for decades.
Nowadays, all transactions on a financial market are recorded, leading to a
huge amount of data available, either for free in the Internet or commercially.
Financial time-series analysis is of great interest to practitioners as well as
to theoreticians, for making inferences and predictions. Furthermore, the
stochastic uncertainties inherent in financial time-series and the theory
needed to deal with them make the subject especially interesting not only to
economists, but also to statisticians and physicists. While it would be a
formidable task to make an exhaustive review on the topic, with this review we
try to give a flavor of some of its aspects.

Categories: nlin.PS, physics.optics
Abstract: We demonstrate existence of waves localized at the interface of two nonlinear
periodic media with different coefficients of the cubic nonlinearity via the
one-dimensional Gross--Pitaevsky equation. We call these waves the surface gap
solitons (SGS). In the case of smooth symmetric periodic potentials, we study
analytically bifurcations of SGS's from standard gap solitons and determine
numerically the maximal jump of the nonlinearity coefficient allowing for the
SGS existence. We show that the maximal jump vanishes near the thresholds of
bifurcations of gap solitons. In the case of continuous potentials with a jump
in the first derivative at the interface, we develop a homotopy method of
continuation of SGS families from the solution obtained via gluing of parts of
the standard gap solitons and study existence of SGS's in the photonic band
gaps. We explain the termination of the SGS families in the interior points of
the band gaps from the bifurcation of linear bound states in the continuous
non-smooth potentials.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, cs.DS, nlin.AO
Abstract: As networks and their structure have become a major field of research, a
strong demand for network visualization has emerged. We address this challenge
by formalizing the well established spring layout in terms of dynamic
equations. We thus open up the design space for new algorithms. Drawing from
the knowledge of systems design, we derive a layout algorithm that remedies
several drawbacks of the original spring layout. This new algorithm relies on
the balancing of two antagonistic forces. We thus call it {\em arf} for
"attractive and repulsive forces". It is, as we claim, particularly suited for
a dynamic layout of smaller networks ($n < 10^3$). We back this claim with
several application examples from on going complex systems research.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Axisymmetric equilibria with incompressible flows of arbitrary direction are
studied in the framework of magnetohydrodynamics under a variety of physically
relevant side conditions. To this end a set of pertinent non-linear ODEs are
transformed to quasilinear ones and the respective initial value problem is
solved numerically with appropriately determined initial values near the
magnetic axis. Several equilibria are then constructed surface by surface. The
non field aligned flow results in novel configurations with a single magnetic
axis, toroidal shell configurations in which the plasma is confined within a
couple of magnetic surfaces and double shell-like configurations. In addition,
the flow affects the elongation and triangularity of the magnetic surfaces.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: In the present letter we suggest a new theoretical model for a quantitative
description of the magnetoreception mechanism in birds. The considered
mechanism involves two types of iron minerals (magnetite and maghemite) which
were found in subcellular compartments within sensory dendrites of the upper
beak of several bird species. The analysis of forces acting between the iron
particles shows that the orientation of the external geomagnetic field can
significantly change the probability of the mechanosensitive ion channels
opening and closing. The performed theoretical analysis shows that the
suggested magnetoreceptor system might be a sensitive biological magnetometer
providing an essential part of the magnetic map for navigation.

Categories: math-ph, cond-mat.other, math.MP, nlin.CD, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Generalization of the Kac integral and Kac method for paths measure based on
the Levy distribution has been used to derive fractional diffusion equation.
Application to nonlinear fractional Ginzburg-Landau equation is discussed.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Admitting the validity of Lorentz transformations for the space as time
coordinates of the same event we derive their differential form in order to
underline the correct prerequisites for the application of time and length
contraction or dilation effects. Furthermore we quantify the simultaneity error
occurring in the relativity theory. Having done this, we analyse the root cause
of these effects and identify it with a finite phase velocity associated with
the moving frame. We define this phase velocity by analogy to the de Broglie
wave associated with a moving particle. Based on this construct we demonstrate
that the phase of the de Broglie waves further extended for stationary
particles is a relativistic invariant being the same for all corresponding
observers. Also the phase of the electromagnetic waves transporting energy at
light speed is a relativistic invariant. Therefore the universe and its matter
/ energy may be seen as a superposition of waves propagating such that their
phase is the same for all corresponding observers. The wave phase may replace
the time as an invariant and universal reference.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: This paper describes the appearance of abnormal film thickness features
formed in elastohydrodynamic contacts lubricated by a fatty alcohol.
Experiments were conducted by varying the slide to roll ratio between a steel
ball and a glass disk in a ball-on-disk type device. Lauric alcohol was used as
lubricant and film thickness was measured in the contact area by optical
interferometry. Experimental results showed that the film thickness
distributions under pure rolling conditions remained classical whereas the film
shape changed when the slide to roll ratio was increased. The thickness in the
central contact area increased and in the same time inlet and exit film
thicknesses were modified. In addition, the film shapes observed when the ball
surface was moving faster than the disk one and those obtained in the opposite
case were different, i.e. when opposite signs but equal absolute values of the
slide to roll ratio were applied.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: A conclusive demonstration has been provided that the nature of the
shear-thinning, that affects both film thickness and traction in EHL contacts,
follows the ordinary power-law rule that has been described by many empirical
models of which Carreau is but one example. This was accomplished by accurate
measurements in viscometers of the shear response of a PAO that possesses a
very low critical stress for shear-thinning and accurate measurements
in-contact of film thickness and traction under conditions which accentuate the
shear-thinning effect. The in-contact central film thickness and traction were
entirely predictable from the rheological properties obtained from viscometers
using simple calculations. These data should be invaluable to researchers
endeavoring to accurately simulate Hertz zone behavior since the shear-thinning
rheology is extensively characterized and accurate in-contact data are
available to test. In addition, a new model has been introduced that may be
useful for the rheological characterization of mixtures.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: After the pioneered experimental works on superlubricity by Martin et al. on
MoS2 [1], Hirano et al. on tungsten and silicon [2] and the further
confirmation by Dienwiebel et al. on graphite [3], many groups around the word
investigated the occurrence of near frictionless sliding contacts. This large
mobilization of tribologists, material sciences specialists and physicists has
lead to emerging solutions involving new materials and coatings, the most
promising being carbon based like graphite, diamond, carbon composites or
diamond-like-carbons. Some of them are currently used in practical
applications. The situation is different especially in EHL: the highest
friction coefficients are close to 10% when traction fluids are involved, i.e.
fluids that have especially designed to transmit the highest friction, and they
vary within 3-6% for the rest of lubricants. The range of variation is
consequently very narrow and these typical values are really low compared to
those obtained in dry contacts: as a consequence the gain expected from a super
low traction regime in lubrication will be probably more limited, especially in
the case of experiments conducted at the meso or macro scales. This weak
perspective could be one explanation on the relatively low number of articles
in recent literature dealing with lubricated superlubricity in the above
conditions.

Categories: physics.ins-det, nucl-ex
Abstract: A lead-glass hodoscope calorimeter that was constructed for use in the
Jefferson Lab Real Compton Scattering experiment is described. The detector
provides a measurement of the coordinates and the energy of scattered photons
in the GeV energy range with resolutions of 5 mm and 6%/\sqrt(E{\gamma} [GeV]).
Features of both the detector design and its performance in the high luminosity
environment during the experiment are presented.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: We compute the stationary in-degree probability, $P_{in}(k)$, for a growing
network model with directed edges and arbitrary out-degree probability. In
particular, under preferential linking, we find that if the nodes have a light
tail (finite variance) out-degree distribution, then the corresponding
in-degree one behaves as $k^{-3}$. Moreover, for an out-degree distribution
with a scale invariant tail, $P_{out}(k)\sim k^{-\alpha}$, the corresponding
in-degree distribution has exactly the same asymptotic behavior only if
$2<\alpha<3$ (infinite variance). Similar results are obtained when
attractiveness is included. We also present some results on descriptive
statistics measures %descriptive statistics such as the correlation between the
number of in-going links, $D_{in}$, and outgoing links, $D_{out}$, and the
conditional expectation of $D_{in}$ given $D_{out}$, and we calculate these
measures for the WWW network. Finally, we present an application to the
scientific publications network. The results presented here can explain the
tail behavior of in/out-degree distribution observed in many real networks.

Categories: physics.ed-ph
Abstract: Students, after they leave our care, are called to solve the diverse problems
of the world, so we should teach to increase transfer: the ability to apply
fundamental principles to new problems and contexts. This ability is rare. The
following pages are from a workshop for faculty on designing courses that
promote transfer. I discuss two design principles: to name the transferable
ideas and to illustrate them with examples from diverse subjects. The
discussion uses dimensional reasoning as the example of a valuable transferable
idea, illustrating it with three diverse examples.

Categories: cond-mat.other, physics.data-an
Abstract: Distributions following a power-law are an ubiquitous phenomenon. Methods for
determining the exponent of a power-law tail by graphical means are often used
in practice but are intrinsically unreliable. Maximum likelihood estimators for
the exponent are a mathematically sound alternative to graphical methods.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The holographic upper bound on entropy is applied to the gravitational action
associated with the non-relativistic contraction of a nebula. A critical radius
is identified, as a function of the initial radius and mass, for which the
number of bits associated with the action would equal the maximum number of
bits allowed to the body. The gravitational action of a typical star
approximately saturates the holographic bound, perhaps suggesting a physical
link between holographic principles and astrophysical processes.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.optics, quant-ph
Abstract: We present a method of computing Casimir forces for arbitrary geometries,
with any desired accuracy, that can directly exploit the efficiency of standard
numerical-electromagnetism techniques. Using the simplest possible
finite-difference implementation of this approach, we obtain both agreement
with past results for cylinder-plate geometries, and also present results for
new geometries. In particular, we examine a piston-like problem involving two
dielectric and metallic squares sliding between two metallic walls, in two and
three dimensions, respectively, and demonstrate non-additive and non-monotonic
changes in the force due to these lateral walls.

Categories: cond-mat.mes-hall, physics.optics
Abstract: Normal-incidence transmission and dispersion properties of optical
multilayers and one-dimensional stepwise potential barriers in the
non-tunneling regime are analytically investigated. The optical paths of every
constituent layer in a multilayer structure, as well as the parameters of every
step of the stepwise potential barrier, are constrained by a generalized
quarter-wave condition. No other restrictions on the structure geometry is
imposed, i.e., the layers are arranged arbitrarily. We show that the density of
states (DOS) spectra of the multilayer or barrier in question are subject to
integral conservation rules similar to the Barnett-Loudon sum rule but ocurring
within a finite frequency or energy interval. In the optical case, these
frequency intervals are regular. For the potential barriers, only non-periodic
energy intervals can be present in the spectrum of any given structure, and
only if the parameters of constituent potential steps are properly chosen.
  Abstract The integral conservation relations derived analytically have also
been verified numerically. The relations can be used in dispersion-engineered
multilayer-based devices, e.g., ultrashort pulse compressors or ultracompact
optical delay lines, as well as to design multiple-quantum-well electronic
heterostructures with engineered DOS.

Categories: q-bio.SC, physics.ed-ph, q-bio.QM
Abstract: A practical introduction to stochastic modelling of reaction-diffusion
processes is presented. No prior knowledge of stochastic simulations is
assumed. The methods are explained using illustrative examples. The article
starts with the classical Gillespie algorithm for the stochastic modelling of
chemical reactions. Then stochastic algorithms for modelling molecular
diffusion are given. Finally, basic stochastic reaction-diffusion methods are
presented. The connections between stochastic simulations and deterministic
models are explained and basic mathematical tools (e.g. chemical master
equation) are presented. The article concludes with an overview of more
advanced methods and problems.

Categories: q-bio.PE, astro-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Data on the prevalence of bone cancer in dinosaurs is available from past
radiological examination of preserved bones. We statistically test this data
for consistency with rates extrapolated from information on bone cancer in
modern vertebrates, and find that there is no evidence of a different rate.
Thus, this test provides no support for a possible role of ionizing radiation
in the K-T extinction event.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, nlin.CD
Abstract: We compute solutions of the Lagrangian-Averaged Navier-Stokes alpha-model
(LANS) for significantly higher Reynolds numbers (up to Re 8300) than have
previously been accomplished. This allows sufficient separation of scales to
observe a Navier-Stokes (NS) inertial range followed by a 2nd LANS inertial
range. The analysis of the third-order structure function scaling supports the
predicted l^3 scaling; it corresponds to a k^(-1) scaling of the energy
spectrum. The energy spectrum itself shows a different scaling which goes as
k^1. This latter spectrum is consistent with the absence of stretching in the
sub-filter scales due to the Taylor frozen-in hypothesis employed as a closure
in the derivation of LANS. These two scalings are conjectured to coexist in
different spatial portions of the flow. The l^3 (E(k) k^(-1)) scaling is
subdominant to k^1 in the energy spectrum, but the l^3 scaling is responsible
for the direct energy cascade, as no cascade can result from motions with no
internal degrees of freedom. We verify the prediction for the size of the LANS
attractor resulting from this scaling. From this, we give a methodology either
for arriving at grid-independent solutions for LANS, or for obtaining a
formulation of a LES optimal in the context of the alpha models. The fully
converged grid-independent LANS may not be the best approximation to a direct
numerical simulation of the NS equations since the minimum error is a balance
between truncation errors and the approximation error due to using LANS instead
of the primitive equations. Furthermore, the small-scale behavior of LANS
contributes to a reduction of flux at constant energy, leading to a shallower
energy spectrum for large alpha. These small-scale features, do not preclude
LANS to reproduce correctly the intermittency properties of high Re flow.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This paper revisits previous papers related to the theory of relativity.
Afterwards, a reconsideration of the hypothesis of ether-dragging is discussed.
The ether is compatible with the theory of relativity and historical
experiments; this paper explains the Michelson-Morley experiment using the
ether-dragging hypothesis without the orthodox interpretation that the speed c
is a fixed constant in terms of any system of inertial coordinates.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In this paper, we used the multiconfiguration Dirac-Fock method to compute
with high precision the influence of the hyperfine interaction on the
$[Ar]3d^{10} 4s4p ^3P_0$ level lifetime in Zn-like ions for stable and some
quasi-stable isotopes of nonzero nuclear spin between Z=30 and Z=92. The
influence of this interaction on the $[Ar]3d^{10} 4s4p ^3P_1 - [Ar]3d^{10} 4s4p
^3P_0$ separation energy is also calculated for the same ions.

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.CD
Abstract: Dielectric micro-cavities are widely used as laser resonators and
characterizations of their spectra are of interest for various applications. We
experimentally investigate micro-lasers of simple shapes (Fabry-Perot, square,
pentagon, and disk). Their lasing spectra consist mainly of almost equidistant
peaks and the distance between peaks reveals the length of a quantized periodic
orbit. To measure this length with a good precision, it is necessary to take
into account different sources of refractive index dispersion. Our experimental
and numerical results agree with the superscar model describing the formation
of long-lived states in polygonal cavities. The limitations of the
two-dimensional approximation are briefly discussed in connection with
micro-disks.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We study cascading failures in networks using a dynamical flow model based on
simple conservation and distribution laws to investigate the impact of
transient dynamics caused by the rebalancing of loads after an initial network
failure (triggering event). It is found that considering the flow dynamics may
imply reduced network robustness compared to previous static overload failure
models. This is due to the transient oscillations or overshooting in the loads,
when the flow dynamics adjusts to the new (remaining) network structure. We
obtain {\em upper} and {\em lower} limits to network robustness, and it is
shown that {\it two} time scales $\tau$ and $\tau_0$, defined by the network
dynamics, are important to consider prior to accurately addressing network
robustness or vulnerability. The robustness of networks showing cascading
failures is generally determined by a complex interplay between the network
topology and flow dynamics, where the ratio $\chi=\tau/\tau_0$ determines the
relative role of the two of them.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: The influence of excited-state absorption (ESA) and two-exciton processes on
a coherent population transfer with intense ultrashort chirped pulses in
molecular systems in solution has been studied. An unified treatment of
adiabatic rapid passage (ARP) in such systems has been developed using a
three-state electronic system with relaxation treated as a diffusion on
electronic potential energy surfaces. We have shown that ESA has a profound
effect on coherent population transfer in large molecules that necessitates a
more accurate interpretation of experimental data. A simple and physically
clear model for ARP in molecules with three electronic states in solution has
been developed by extending the Landau-Zener calculations putting in a third
level to random crossing of levels. A method for quantum control of two-exciton
states in molecular complexes has been proposed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report on the frequency performance of a low cost (~500$) radio-frequency
sine wave generator, using direct digital synthesis (DDS) and a
field-programmable gate array (FPGA). The output frequency of the device may be
changed dynamically to any arbitrary value ranging from DC to 10 MHz without
any phase slip. Sampling effects are substantially reduced by a high sample
rate, up to 1 MHz, and by a large memory length, more than 2.10^5 samples. By
using a low noise external oscillator to clock the DDS, we demonstrate a phase
noise as low as that of the master clock, that is at the level of -113
dB.rad^2/Hz at 1 Hz from the carrier for an output frequency of 3.75 MHz. The
device is successfully used to confine an ultracold atomic cloud of rubidium 87
in a RF-based trap, and there is no extra heating from the RF source.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The general relativity is the base for any exact evolutionary theory of large
scale structures. We calculate the universal 2+1-dimensional plane equations of
gravitational field in general relativity. Based on the equations, the
evolutions of disk nebula are discussed. A system of nebula can form binary
stars or single star for different conditions. While any simplified linear
theory forms only a single star system. It is proved that the nonlinear
interactions are very general, so the binary stars are also common.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: After negative temperature is restated, we find that it will derive
necessarily decrease of entropy. Negative temperature is based on the Kelvin
scale and the condition dU>0 and dS<0. Conversely, there is also negative
temperature for dU<0 and dS>0. But, negative temperature is contradiction with
usual meaning of temperature and with some basic concepts of physics and
mathematics. It is a question in nonequilibrium thermodynamics. We proposed a
possibility of decrease of entropy due to fluctuation magnified and internal
interactions in some isolated systems. From this we discuss some possible
examples and theories.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, astro-ph, nlin.CD, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: This paper is a detailed report on a programme of simulations used to settle
a long-standing issue in the dynamo theory and demonstrate that the fluctuation
dynamo exists in the limit of large magnetic Reynolds number Rm>>1 and small
magnetic Prandtl number Pm<<1. The dependence of the critical Rm_c vs. the
hydrodynamic Reynolds number Re is obtained for 1<Re<6700. In the limit Pm<<1,
Rm_c is ~3 times larger than for Pm>1. The stability curve Rm_c(Re) (and, it is
argued, the nature of the dynamo) is substantially different from the case of
the simulations and liquid-metal experiments with a mean flow. It is not as yet
possible to determine numerically whether the growth rate is ~Rm^{1/2} in the
limit Re>>Rm>>1, as should be the case if the dynamo is driven by the
inertial-range motions. The magnetic-energy spectrum in the low-Pm regime is
qualitatively different from the Pm>1 case and appears to develop a negative
spectral slope, although current resolutions are insufficient to determine its
asymptotic form. At 1<Rm<Rm_c, the magnetic fluctuations induced via the
tangling by turbulence of a weak mean field are investigated and the
possibility of a k^{-1} spectrum above the resistive scale is examined. At low
Rm<1, the induced fluctuations are well described by the quasistatic
approximation; the k^{-11/3} spectrum is confirmed for the first time in direct
numerical simulations.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The dynamics of many socioeconomic systems is determined by the decision
making process of agents. The decision process depends on agent's
characteristics, such as preferences, risk aversion, behavioral biases, etc..
In addition, in some systems the size of agents can be highly heterogeneous
leading to very different impacts of agents on the system dynamics. The large
size of some agents poses challenging problems to agents who want to control
their impact, either by forcing the system in a given direction or by hiding
their intentionality. Here we consider the financial market as a model system,
and we study empirically how agents strategically adjust the properties of
large orders in order to meet their preference and minimize their impact. We
quantify this strategic behavior by detecting scaling relations of allometric
nature between the variables characterizing the trading activity of different
institutions. We observe power law distributions in the investment time
horizon, in the number of transactions needed to execute a large order and in
the traded value exchanged by large institutions and we show that heterogeneity
of agents is a key ingredient for the emergence of some aggregate properties
characterizing this complex system.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: The ordered addition of two Lorentz boosts is normally shown to result in a
boost by utilizing concepts from group theory and non-Euclidian geometry. We
present a method for achieving this addition by performing a sequence of
spatial rotations and uni-dimensional Lorentz transformations. The method is
first developed for two-dimensional space and it is then extended to
three-dimensional space by utilizing the commutative property of the rotation
of the y-z plane and a boost along the x-axis. The method employs only matrix
multiplication and certain invariant quantities that are natural consequences
of spatial rotations and Lorentz transformations. The combining of two boosts
in different directions into a single boost cannot be expected a priori because
we show that the converse of this statement is not true. That is, two rotations
interspersed with a boost cannot always be reduced to a single rotation
preceded and followed by boosts.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Contact electrification and triboelectrification are well-known in the case
of dissimilar materials, however the case of charge exchange during friction
between nominally identical insulating materials is less documented. We
experimentally investigated the triboelectrification between two smooth
monocrystalline &#945;-Al 2O 3 (sapphire) antagonists by surface force
measurements with a Surface Force Apparatus (SFA). The force between a sphere
and a plane, both in sapphire, was measured as a function of the sphere-plane
distance D, before and after nano-friction tests, under dry argon atmosphere.
Respective contributions of van der Waals, water meniscus and electrostatic
forces were determined. The estimated Hamaker constant was in good agreement
with the Lifshitz theory, and the dominant meniscus attraction at low
separation could be overcome with small radius sphere. We demonstrated that
electrostatic forces were generated by the nano-friction test and we quantified
the adhesion that results from this contact-electrification. In the first stage
of the unloading process, the short range electrostatic force was found to vary
both with time and distance D. Experimental results were correlated with
surface densities of mobile charges on the two surfaces, and the
time-dependence was related to classical surface transport phenomena on alumina
surfaces.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Starting from the governing equations for a quantum magnetoplasma including
the quantum Bohm potential and electron spin-1/2 effects, we show that the
system of quantum magnetohydrodynamic (QMHD) equations admit rarefactive
solitons due to the balance between nonlinearities and quantum
diffraction/tunneling effects. It is found that the electron spin-1/2 effect
introduces a pressure-like term with negative sign in the QMHD equations, which
modifies the shape of the solitary magnetosonic waves and makes them wider and
shallower. Numerical simulations of the time-dependent system shows the
development of rarefactive QMHD solitary waves that are modified by the spin
effects.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: The frequency distribution of DNA bases A, C, G, T exhibit fractal
fluctuations ubiquitous to dynamical systems in nature. The power spectra of
fractal fluctuations exhibit inverse power law form signifying long-range
correlations between local (small-scale) and global (large-scale)
perturbations. The author has developed a general systems theory based on
classical statistical physics for fractal fluctuations which predicts that the
probability distribution of eddy amplitudes and the variance (square of eddy
amplitude)spectrum of fractal fluctuations follow the universal Boltzmann
inverse power law expressed as a function of the golden mean. The model
predicted distribution is very close to statistical normal distribution for
fluctuations within two standard deviations from the mean and exhibits a fat
long tail. In this paper it is shown that DNA base CG frequency distribution in
Takifugu rubripes (Puffer fish) Genome Release 4 exhibit universal inverse
power law form consistent with model prediction. The observed long-range
correlations in the DNA bases implies that the non-coding 'junk' or 'selfish'
DNA which appear to be redundant, may also contribute to the efficient
functioning of the protein coding DNA, a result supported by recent studies.

Categories: q-fin.ST, cond-mat.other, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The cross-correlations between price fluctuations of 201 frequently traded
stocks in the National Stock Exchange (NSE) of India are analyzed in this
paper. We use daily closing prices for the period 1996-2006, which coincides
with the period of rapid transformation of the market following liberalization.
The eigenvalue distribution of the cross-correlation matrix, $\mathbf{C}$, of
NSE is found to be similar to that of developed markets, such as the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE): the majority of eigenvalues fall within the bounds
expected for a random matrix constructed from mutually uncorrelated time
series. Of the few largest eigenvalues that deviate from the bulk, the largest
is identified with market-wide movements. The intermediate eigenvalues that
occur between the largest and the bulk have been associated in NYSE with
specific business sectors with strong intra-group interactions. However, in the
Indian market, these deviating eigenvalues are comparatively very few and lie
much closer to the bulk. We propose that this is because of the relative lack
of distinct sector identity in the market, with the movement of stocks
dominantly influenced by the overall market trend. This is shown by explicit
construction of the interaction network in the market, first by generating the
minimum spanning tree from the unfiltered correlation matrix, and later, using
an improved method of generating the graph after filtering out the market mode
and random effects from the data. Both methods show, compared to developed
markets, the relative absence of clusters of co-moving stocks that belong to
the same business sector. This is consistent with the general belief that
emerging markets tend to be more correlated than developed markets.

Categories: physics.pop-ph, physics.soc-ph, q-fin.GN
Abstract: In many professons employees are rewarded according to their relative
performance. Corresponding economy can be modeled by taking $N$ independent
agents who gain from the market with a rate which depends on their current
gain. We argue that this simple realistic rate generates a scale free
distribution even though intrinsic ability of agents are marginally different
from each other. As an evidence we provide distribution of scores for two
different systems (a) the global stock game where players invest in real stock
market and (b) the international cricket.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, cond-mat.soft
Abstract: We have recorded fluorescence spectra of the atomic rubidium D-lines in the
presence of several hundreds of bars buffer gas pressure. With additional
saturation broadening a spectral linewidth comparable to the thermal energy of
the atoms in the heated gas cell is achieved. An intensity-dependent blue
asymmetry of the spectra is observed, which becomes increasingly pronounced
when extrapolating to infinitely high light intensity. We interpret our results
as evidence for the dressed (coupled atom-light) states to approach thermal
equilibrium.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Photonic molecules, named by analogy with chemical molecules, are clusters of
closely located electromagnetically interacting microcavities or "photonic
atoms". As two or several microcavities are brought close together, their
optical modes interact, and a rich spectrum of photonic molecule supermodes
emerges, which depends both on geometrical and material properties of
individual cavities and on their mutual interactions. Here, we discuss ways of
controllable manipulation of photonic molecule supermodes, which improve or add
new functionalities to microcavity-based optical components. We present several
optimally-tuned photonic molecule designs for lowering thresholds of
semiconductor microlasers, producing directional light emission, enhancing
sensitivity of microcavity-based bio(chemical)sensors, and optimizing
electromagnetic energy transfer around bends of coupled-cavity waveguides.
Photonic molecules composed of identical microcavities as well as of
microcavities with various degrees of size or material detuning are discussed.
Microwave experiments on scaled photonic molecule structures are currently
under way to confirm our theoretical predictions.

Categories: astro-ph, hep-th, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We study electric potential of a charge placed in a strong magnetic field
B>>4.4x10^{13}G, as modified by the vacuum polarization. In such field the
electron Larmour radius is much less than its Compton length. At the Larmour
distances a scaling law occurs, with the potential determined by a
magnetic-field-independent function. The scaling regime implies short-range
interaction, expressed by Yukawa law. The electromagnetic interaction regains
its long-range character at distances larger than the Compton length, the
potential decreasing across the magnetic field faster than along. Correction to
the nonrelativistic ground-state energy of a hydrogenlike atom is found. In the
infinite-magnetic-field limit the modified potential becomes the Dirac
delta-function plus a regular background. With this potential the ground-state
energy is finite - the best pronounced effect of the vacuum polarization.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: This paper uses firm-level data recorded in the AMADEUS database to
investigate the distribution of labour productivity in different European
countries. We find that the upper tail of the empirical productivity
distributions follows a decaying power-law, whose exponent $\alpha$ is obtained
by a semi-parametric estimation technique recently developed by Clementi et al.
(2006). The emergence of "fat tails" in productivity distribution has already
been detected in Di Matteo et al. (2005) and explained by means of a model of
social network. Here we show that this model is tested on a broader sample of
countries having different patterns of social network structure. These
different social attitudes, measured using a social capital indicator, reflect
in the power-law exponent estimates, verifying in this way the existence of
linkages among firms' productivity performance and social network.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, cond-mat.soft, physics.comp-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: We study thermal Casimir and quantum non-retarded Lifshitz interactions
between dielectrics in general geometries. We map the calculation of the
classical partition function onto a determinant which we discretize and
evaluate with the help of Cholesky factorization. The quantum partition
function is treated by path integral quantization of a set of interacting
dipoles and reduces to a product of determinants. We compare the approximations
of pairwise additivity and proximity force with our numerical methods. We
propose a ``factorization approximation'' which gives rather good numerical
results in the geometries that we study.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.med-ph
Abstract: An acousto-optic cell was used to reduce the speckle noise that reduces the
quality of Hartmann-Shack and other wave-front sensors measuring ocular
aberrations. In the method presented here, a laser beam traverses an
acousto-optic cell, interacting with standing acoustic waves. Speckle reduction
takes place as the incoming beam is diffractively spread across the cornea. The
increased size and the wider angular spread of the incoming beam average out
the speckles, producing a more uniform response of the wave-front sensor.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present a generalization of the pioneering results obtained for single
K-shell photoionization of H-like ions by M. Stobbe [Ann. Phys. 7 (1930) 661]
to the case of the helium isoelectronic sequence. The total cross section of
the process is calculated, taking into account the correlation corrections to
first order of the perturbation theory with respect to the electron-electron
interaction. Predictions are made for the entire non-relativistic energy
domain. The phenomenon of dynamical suppression of correlation effects in the
ionization cross section is discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The principal limits for the accuracy of the resonance frequency measurements
set by the asymmetry of the natural resonance line shape are studied and
applied to the recent accurate frequency measurements in the two-photon 1s-2s
resonance and in the one-photon 1s-2p resonance in hydrogen atom. This limit
for 1s-2s resonance is found to be $\sim 10^{-5}$ Hz compared to the accuracy
achieved in experiment $\pm 46$ Hz. In case of deuterium atom the limit is
essentially larger: $10^{-2}$ Hz. For 1s-2p resonance the accuracy limit is
0.17 MHz while the uncertainty of the recent frequency measurement is about 6
MHz.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: Analytical relationships for the surface and curvature energies of oblate and
prolate semi-spheroidal atomic clusters have been obtained. By modifying the
cluster shape from a spheroid to a semi-spheroid the most stable shape was
changed from a sphere to a superdeformed prolate semi-spheroid (including the
flat surface of the end cap). Potential energy surfaces vs. deformation and the
number of atoms, N, illustrate this property independent of N.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Potential energy curves for excited leptonic states of the
helium-antihydrogen system are calculated within Ritz' variational approach. An
explicitly correlated ansatz for the leptonic wave function is employed
describing accurately the motion of the leptons (two electrons and positron) in
the field of the helium nucleus and of the antiproton with arbitrary orbital
angular momentum projection $\Lambda$ onto the internuclear axis. Results for
$\Lambda$=0, 1 and 30 are presented. For quasibound states with large values of
$\Lambda$ and rotational quantum numbers $J>\Lambda$ no annihilation and
rearrangement decay channels occur, i. e. they are metastable.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, astro-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We study semi-analytically and in a consistent manner, the generation of a
mean velocity field $\bar{\mathbf{U}}$ by helical MHD turbulence, and the
effect that this field can have on a Mean Field Dynamo. Assuming a prescribed,
maximally helical small scale velocity field, we show that large scale flows
can be generated in MHD turbulent flows, via small scale Lorentz force. These
flows back-react on the mean electromotive force of a Mean Field Dynamo through
new terms, leaving the original $\alpha $ and $\beta $ terms explicitly
unmodified. Cross-helicity plays the key role in interconnecting all the
effects. In the minimal $\tau$ closure that we chose to work with, the effects
are stronger for large relaxation times.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: My object in the present paper is to: (1) introduce physicists to the life
and work of Whitehead; (2) outline the content of his book "The Principle of
Relativity"; (3) present Whitehead's basic criticism of the General Theory of
Relativity which, to my mind, has never been rebutted or properly appreciated,
even by GTR specialists; (4) propose a significant relevant research problem;
and (5) summarize some of the rather radical implications of the acceptance of
Whitehead's observations, including that spacetime is not curved.

Categories: nlin.CD, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: We continue our study of chaotic mixing and transport of passive particles in
a simple model of a meandering jet flow [Prants, et al, Chaos {\bf 16}, 033117
(2006)]. In the present paper we study and explain phenomenologically a
connection between dynamical, topological, and statistical properties of
chaotic mixing and transport in the model flow in terms of dynamical traps,
singular zones in the phase space where particles may spend arbitrary long but
finite time [Zaslavsky, Phys. D {\bf 168--169}, 292 (2002)]. The transport of
passive particles is described in terms of lengths and durations of zonal
flights which are events between two successive changes of sign of zonal
velocity. Some peculiarities of the respective probability density functions
for short flights are proven to be caused by the so-called rotational-islands
traps connected with the boundaries of resonant islands (including those of the
vortex cores) filled with the particles moving in the same frame. Whereas, the
statistics of long flights can be explained by the influence of the so-called
ballistic-islands traps filled with the particles moving from a frame to frame.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In his paper the heating of the fullerenes by ultra-short laser pulses is
investigated. The thermal Heaviside equation is formulated and solved for the
Cauchy initial condition The effective thermal relaxation time is calculated..
  Key words: fullerenes, Heaviside thermal equation, effective thermal
relaxation time.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We study the quantum properties of Rydberg atoms in a magnetic
Ioffe-Pritchard trap which is superimposed by a homogeneous electric field.
Trapped Rydberg atoms can be created in long-lived electronic states exhibiting
a permanent electric dipole moment of several hundred Debye. The resulting
dipole-dipole interaction in conjunction with the radial confinement is
demonstrated to give rise to an effectively one-dimensional ultracold Rydberg
gas with a macroscopic interparticle distance. We derive analytical expressions
for the electric dipole moment and the critical linear density of Rydberg
atoms.

Categories: astro-ph, hep-ph, physics.atom-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: We calculate the sensitivity of the inversion spectrum of ammonia to possible
time-variation of the ratio of the proton mass to the electron mass,
mu=m_p/m_e. For the inversion transition (lambda= 1.25 cm^{-1}) the relative
frequency shift is significantly enhanced: delta(omega)/omega=-4.46,
delta(mu)/mu. This enhancement allows one to increase sensitivity to the
time-variation of mu using NH_3 spectra for high redshift objects. We use
published data on microwave spectra of the object B0218+357 to place the limit
delta(mu)/mu =(0.6 +/- 1.9) 10^{-6} at redshift z=0.6847; this limit is several
times better than the limits obtained by different methods and may be
significantly improved. Assuming linear time dependence we obtain
dot{mu}/mu=(-1 +/- 3) 10^{-16} yr^{-1}.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The bandstructure was calculated by the full-potential linearized augmented
plane wave method. The result reveals two important insights to the novel
second harmonic generation (SHG) of alpha-phase lithium iodate
($\alpha-LiIO_{3}$) crystal: the existence of finite intra-band momentum matrix
elements due to the non-inversion symmetry of the crystal illuminating the
potential of the intra-band transition, and the strong covalent bonding between
the $I$-atoms and the ligand $O$-atoms resulting the condition of the
double-resonance. An inter-band transition scenario in SHG as $\alpha-LiIO_{3}$
in nano-structure is proposed. The optical properties were calculated within
the theoretical framework of the time-dependent perturbation of the
independent-particle model. The dielectric tensors and the refractive index
were evaluated. Comparisons between the predictions and the results were made:
the x-ray near edge absorption spectra; the refractive index at the static
limit, and at finite frequencies. Possible factors attributing the calculation
errors is discussed.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We consider a social system of interacting heterogeneous agents with learning
abilities, a model close to Random Field Ising Models, where the random field
corresponds to the idiosyncratic willingness to pay. Given a fixed price,
agents decide repeatedly whether to buy or not a unit of a good, so as to
maximize their expected utilities. We show that the equilibrium reached by the
system depends on the nature of the information agents use to estimate their
expected utilities.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We consider a model of socially interacting individuals that make a binary
choice in a context of positive additive endogenous externalities. It
encompasses as particular cases several models from the sociology and economics
literature. We extend previous results to the case of a general distribution of
idiosyncratic preferences, called here Idiosyncratic Willingnesses to Pay
(IWP). Positive additive externalities yield a family of inverse demand curves
that include the classical downward sloping ones but also new ones with non
constant convexity. When j, the ratio of the social influence strength to the
standard deviation of the IWP distribution, is small enough, the inverse demand
is a classical monotonic (decreasing) function of the adoption rate. Even if
the IWP distribution is mono-modal, there is a critical value of j above which
the inverse demand is non monotonic, decreasing for small and high adoption
rates, but increasing within some intermediate range. Depending on the price
there are thus either one or two equilibria. Beyond this first result, we
exhibit the generic properties of the boundaries limiting the regions where the
system presents different types of equilibria (unique or multiple). These
properties are shown to depend only on qualitative features of the IWP
distribution: modality (number of maxima), smoothness and type of support
(compact or infinite). The main results are summarized as phase diagrams in the
space of the model parameters, on which the regions of multiple equilibria are
precisely delimited.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We show in spatially one dimensional Madelung fluid that a simple requirement
on local stability of the maximum of quantum probability density will, if
combined with the global scale invariance of quantum potential, lead to a class
of quantum probability densities globally being self-trapped by their own
self-generated quantum potentials, possessing only a finite-size spatial
support. It turns out to belong to a class of the most probable wave function
given its energy through the maximum entropy principle. We proceed to show that
there is a limiting case in which the quantum probability density becomes the
stationary-moving soliton-like solution of the Schr\"odinger equation.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We use optical tweezers to perform stretching experiments on DNA molecules
when interacting with the drugs daunomycin and ethidium bromide, which
intercalate the DNA molecule. These experiments are performed in the low-force
regime from zero up to 2 pN. Our results show that the persistence length of
the DNA-drug complexes increases strongly as the drug concentration increases
up to some critical value. Above this critical value, the persistence length
decreases abruptly and remains practically constant for larger drug
concentrations. The contour length of the molecules increases monotonically and
saturates as drugs concentration increases. Measured in- tercalants critical
concentrations for the persistence length transition coincide with reported
values for the helix-coil transition of DNA-drug complexes, obtained from
sedimentation experiments.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: In this work, we study the size of the particles involved in a powder snow
avalanche phenomenon. To determine these sizes, we study all the phenomena the
particles have to face before arriving in the "body" of the avalanche. We study
the boundary layer which is at the bottom of the avalanche. We determine, with
the help of experimental data, the range of size of the particles that can be
entrained by the avalanche. We then examine the possibility for these particles
to reach the top of the boundary layer, and so to take part in the avalanche.
Our final result is that the more frequent particles suspended in a powder snow
avalanche have a size lower than 200 micrometers.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: In this work, we consider several types of lubricants - including
non-Newtonian fluids - that were studied under various operating conditions
leading us to explore a wide range of dimensionless parameters. The
experimental results are compared with predictions given by the usual
analytical EHL relationships and by more recently developed models. This broad
comparison conducted with particular emphasis on minimum film thickness (hm)
showed a fair agreement between experimental data and a few predictions
including some obtained from extended models. Commonly used elasto-hydrodynamic
lubrication (EHL) models did not systematically gave accurate hm estimation,
whereas minimum film thickness not only is a yield value but also serves as a
key parameter in estimating lubrication regimes.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Yield design formulation for porous media subjected to flow, using
approximate pressure field. We attempt here to use the kinematic method of
yield design in the case of a porous medium subjected to flow (with or without
free surface), without looking for the exact solution of the pressure field.
The method proposed here is based on the use of approximate pressure fields. In
this paper, we show how, under different conditions concerning the yield
criterion and the velocity field, the use of such approximate fields allows to
obtain a necessary condition for stability without having to find the real
pressure field. Nous cherchons ici \`a utiliser la m\'ethode cin\'ematique du
calcul \`a la rupture dans le cas d'un milieu poreux soumis \`a un \'ecoulement
avec ou sans surface libre sans conna\^itre la solution exacte du champ de
pression. La m\'ethode propos\'ee ici repose sur l'utilisation de champs de
pression approch\'es par d\'efaut. Nous montrerons comment sous certaines
conditions portant sur le crit\`ere de r\'esistance et sur le champ de vitesse
utilis\'e, l'utilisation de tels champs de pression approch\'es permet
d'obtenir une condition n\'ecessaire de stabilit\'e sans avoir \`a d\'eterminer
exactement l'\'ecoulement.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: An analogy between electromagnetism and acoustics is presented in 2D. The
propagation of sound in presence of absorbing material is modeled using an open
boundary microwave package. Validation is performed through analytical and
experimental results. Application to local impedance active control for free
field sound absorption is finally described.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: Linear thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) and specific heat of Ti bulk is
investigated by means of molecular dynamics simulation. Elastic Minimum Image
Convention of periodic boundary conditions is introduced to allow the bulk to
adjust its size according to the new temporarily fixed temperature. The TEC and
the specific heat of Ti are compared to the available theoretical and
experimental data.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: Based only on the information gathered in a snapshot of a directed network,
we present a formal way of checking if the proposed model is correct for the
empirical growing network under study. In particular, we show how to estimate
the attractiveness, and present an application of the model presented in
[arxiv:0704.1847] to the scientific publications network from the ISI dataset.

Categories: physics.class-ph, physics.ed-ph
Abstract: A beautiful theorem due to J. L. F. Bertrand concerning the laws of
attraction that admit bounded closed orbits for arbitrarily chosen initial
conditions is translated from French into English.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Solid state lasers are demanding independent control in the gain media and
cavity loss to achieve ultra short laser pulses using passive mode-locking.
Recently, laser mode-locking is achieved with a MBE structure with multiple
quantum wells, designed to achieve two functions; Bragg mirror and changes in
absorption to control the cavity dynamics. The use of an AlGaAs/AlAs Bragg
mirror with a 15 nm GaAs saturable absorber used in a Cr:LiSAF tuneable laser
proved to be effective to produce femtosecond pulses. The use of saturable
absorbers thus far is a trial and error procedure that is changing due to the
correlation with more predictive procedures.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Prominent ethical and policy issues such as affirmative action and female
enrollment in science and engineering revolve around the idea that diversity is
good. However, even though diversity is an ambiguous concept, a precise
definition is seldom provided. We show that diversity may be construed as a
factual description, a craving for symmetry, an intrinsic good, an instrumental
good, a symptom, or a side effect. These acceptions differ vastly in their
nature and properties. The first one cannot lead to any action and the second
one is mistaken. Diversity as intrinsic good is a mere opinion, which cannot be
concretely applied; moreover, the most commonly invoked forms of diversity
(sexual and racial) are not intrinsically good. On the other hand, diversity as
instrumental good can be evaluated empirically and can give rise to policies,
but these may be very weak. Finally, symptoms and side effects are not actually
about diversity. We consider the example of female enrollment in science and
engineering, interpreting the various arguments found in the literature in
light of this polysemy.
  Keywords: ethics, policy, higher education, female students, minority
students, affirmative action

Categories: cond-mat.str-el, nucl-th, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The widely used large-scale diagonalization method using harmonic oscillator
basis functions (an instance of the Rayleigh-Ritz method, also called a
spectral method, configuration-interaction method, or ``exact diagonalization''
method) is systematically analyzed using results for the convergence of Hermite
function series. We apply this theory to a Hamiltonian for a one-dimensional
model of a quantum dot. The method is shown to converge slowly, and the
non-smooth character of the interaction potential is identified as the main
problem with the chosen basis, while on the other hand its important advantages
are pointed out. An effective interaction obtained by a similarity
transformation is proposed for improving the convergence of the diagonalization
scheme, and numerical experiments are performed to demonstrate the improvement.
Generalizations to more particles and dimensions are discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We present a simple quantum mechanical model to describe Coulomb explosion of
H$_2^+$ by short, intense, infrared laser pulses. The model is based on the
length gauge version of the molecular strong-field approximation and is valid
for pulses shorter than 50 fs where the process of dissociation prior to
ionization is negligible. The results are compared with recent experimental
results for the proton energy spectrum [I. Ben-Itzhak et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 073002 (2005), B. D. Esry et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 013003 (2006)]. The
predictions of the model reproduce the profile of the spectrum although the
peak energy is slightly lower than the observations. For comparison, we also
present results obtained by two different tunneling models for this process.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Mammoths lived in Arctic East Siberia. In this region there is not sufficient
sunlight over the year for the growth of the plants on which these animals
feed. Therefore the latitude of this region was lower before the end of the
Pleistocene. As the cause of this geographic pole shift, we postulate a massive
object, which moved in an extremely eccentric orbit and was hot from tidal work
and solar radiation. Evaporation produced a disk-shaped cloud of ions around
the Sun. This cloud partially shielded the solar radiation, producing the cold
and warm periods that characterize the Pleistocene. The shielding depends on
the inclination of Earth's orbit, which has a period of 100'000 years. The
cloud builds up to a density at which inelastic particle collisions induce its
collapse The resulting near-periodic time dependence resembles that of
Dansgaard-Oeschger events. During cold periods fine grained inclusions were
deposited into the ice. The Pleistocene ended when the massive object had a
close encounter with the Earth, which suffered a one per mil stretching
deformation. While the deformation relaxed to an equilibrium shape in one to
several years, the globe turned relative to the rotation axis: The North Pole
moved from Greenland to the Arctic Sea. The massive object was torn to pieces,
which evaporated.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The present work performs full bandstructure calculations to investigate the
structural effect and the transition mechanisms of the second harmonic
generation (SHG) susceptibility of the $\alpha-LiIO_{3}$ crystal. The anomalous
inconsistency of associated experimental data of the SHG susceptibility tensor
is elucidated to be dominated by the structural effect especially on the
topology of $O$-atoms. On the manipulation of the structural effect, the
modification of SHG susceptibility using an external pressure is simulated. The
calculations of SHG susceptibility tensor are completed at finite frequencies
and the static limit. The comparison with the experiments is also incorporated.
On the analysis of the transition mechanisms, the inter-band transition is
determined to entirely dominate the whole SHG susceptibility at the static
limit; however, the effect of the intra-band motion is revealed to be as
important as that of the inter-band transition at finite frequencies.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: The following question is addressed: under what conditions can a strange
diffusive process, defined by a semi-dynamical V-Langevin equation or its
associated Hybrid kinetic equation (HKE), be described by an equivalent purely
stochastic process, defined by a Continuous Time Random Walk (CTRW) or by a
Fractional Differential Equation (FDE)? More specifically, does there exist a
class of V-Langevin equations with long-range (algebraic) velocity temporal
correlation, that leads to a time-fractional superdiffusive process? The answer
is always affirmative in one dimension. It is always negative in two
dimensions: any algebraically decaying temporal velocity correlation (with a
Gaussian spatial correlation) produces a normal diffusive process. General
conditions relating the diffusive nature of the process to the temporal
exponent of the Lagrangian velocity correlation (in Corrsin approximation) are
derived.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: We study the energy deposition by light and heavy nuclei in tissue-like media
as used for cancer therapy. The depth-dose distributions for protons, $^{3}$He,
$^{12}$C, $^{20}$Ne, and $^{58}$Ni nuclei are calculated within a Monte Carlo
model based on the GEANT4 toolkit. These distributions are compared with each
other and with available experimental data. It is demonstrated that nuclear
fragmentation reactions essentially reduce the peak-to-plateau ratio of the
dose profiles for deeply penetrating energetic ions heavier than $^{3}$He. On
the other hand, all projectiles up to $^{20}$Ne were found equally suitable for
therapeutic use at low penetration depths.

Categories: nlin.AO, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.QM
Abstract: Is it possible to link a set of nodes without using preexisting positional
information or any kind of long-range attraction of the nodes? Can the process
of generating positional information, i.e. the detection of ``unknown'' nodes
and the estabishment of chemical gradients, \emph{and} the process of network
formation, i.e. the establishment of links between nodes, occur in parallel, on
a comparable time scale, as a process of co-evolution?
  The paper discusses a model where the generation of relevant information for
establishing the links between nodes results from the interaction of many
\emph{agents}, i.e. subunits of the system that are capable of performing some
activities. Their collective interaction is based on (indirect) communication,
which also includes memory effects and the dissemination of information in the
system. The relevant (``pragmatic'') information that leads to the
establishment of the links then emerges from an evolutionary interplay of
selection and reamplification.

Categories: physics.ins-det, hep-ex
Abstract: This article discusses the techniques used to select online promising events
at high energy and high luminosity colliders. After a brief introduction,
explaining some general aspects of triggering, the more specific implementation
options for well established machines like the Tevatron and Large Hadron
Collider are presented. An outlook on what difficulties need to be met is given
when designing trigger systems at the Super Large Hadron Collider, or at the
International Linear Collider

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is proposed to apply a recently developed concept of local wave velocities
to the dynamical field characteristics, especially for the canonical field
energy density. It is shown that local energy velocities can be derived from
the lagrangian directly. The local velocities of zero- and first- order for
energy propagation has been obtained for special cases of scalar and vector
fields. Some important special cases of these results are discussed.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We report on the observation of enhanced microwave transmission through
quasi-periodic hole arrays in metal films. The fraction of transmitted light
reaches 50% in a self-standing metal film and approaches 90% when the film is
sandwiched between thin dielectric slabs, while the holes occupy only 10% of
the sample area. The maximum transmission is accompanied by zero phase change,
rendering the film almost 'invisible' over a wide frequency range. The
extraordinary transmission phenomenon is interpreted in terms of resonances in
the self-consistent interaction between holes, which are represented by
effective electric and magnetic dipoles.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We study the flow response to an externally imposed homogeneous magnetic
field in a turbulent swirling flow of liquid sodium -- the VKS2 experiment in
which magnetic Reynolds numbers Rm up to 50 are reached. Induction effects are
larger than in the former VKS1 experiment. At Rm larger than about 25, the
local amplitude of induced field components supersedes that of the applied
field, and exhibits non-Gaussian fluctuations. Slow dynamical instationarities
and low-frequency bimodal dynamics are observed in the induction, presumably
tracing back to large scale fluctuations in the hydrodynamic flow.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.ao-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Author offers and researches a new, cheap method for the extraction of
freshwater from the Earth atmosphere. The suggected method is fundamentally
dictinct from all existing methods that extract freshwater from air. All other
industrial methods extract water from a saline water source (in most cases from
seawater). This new method may be used at any point in the Earth except Polar
Zones. It does not require long-distance freshwater transportation. If seawater
is not utilized for increasing its productivity, this inexpensive new method is
very environment-friendly. The author method has two working versions: (1) the
first variant the warm (hot) atmospheric air is lifted by the inflatable tube
in a high altitude and atmospheric steam is condenced into freswater: (2) in
the second version, the warm air is pumped 20-30 meters under the sea-surface.
In the first version, wind and solar heating of air are used for causing air
flow. In version (2) wind and propeller are used for causing air movment.
  The first method does not need energy, the second needs a small amount.
Moreover, in variant (1) the freshwater has a high pressure (>30 or more atm.)
and can be used for production of energy such as electricity and in that way
the freshwater cost is lower. For increasing the productivity the seawater is
injected into air and solar air heater may be used. The solar air heater
produces a huge amount of electricity as a very powerful electricity generation
plant. The offered electricity installation in 100 - 200 times cheaper than any
common electric plant of equivalent output.
  Key words: Extraction freshwater, method of getting freshwater, receiving
energy from atmosphere, powerful renewal electric plant.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: CLIC is a linear $e^+e^-$ ($\gamma\gamma$) collider project which uses a
drive beam to accelerate the main beam. The drive beam provides RF power for
each corresponding unit of the main linac through energy extracting RF
structures. CLIC has a wide range of center-of-mass energy options from 150 GeV
to 3 TeV. The present paper contains optimization of Free Electron Laser (FEL)
using one bunch of CLIC drive beam in order to provide polarized light
amplification using appropriate wiggler and luminosity spectrum of
$\gamma\gamma$ collider for $E_{cm}$=0.5 TeV. Then amplified laser can be
converted to a polarized high-energy $\gamma$ beam at the Conversion point
(CP-prior to electron positron interaction point) in the process of Compton
backscattering. At the CP a powerful laser pulse (FEL) focused to main linac
electrons (positrons). Here this scheme described and it is show that CLIC
drive beam parameters satisfy the requirement of FEL additionally essential
undulator parameters has been defined. Achievable $\gamma\gamma$ luminosity is
above $10^{34}$.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present an analytic theory of the diffraction of (matter) waves by a
lattice in the "quasi-Bragg" regime, by which we mean the transition region
between the long-interaction Bragg and "channelling" regimes and the
short-interaction Raman-Nath regime. The Schroedinger equation is solved by
adiabatic expansion, using the conventional adiabatic approximation as a
starting point, and re-inserting the result into the Schroedinger equation to
yield a second order correction. Closed expressions for arbitrary pulse shapes
and diffraction orders are obtained and the losses of the population to output
states otherwise forbidden by the Bragg condition are derived. We consider the
phase shift due to couplings of the desired output to these states that depends
on the interaction strength and duration and show how these can be kept
negligible by a choice of smooth (e.g., Gaussian) envelope functions even in
situations that substantially violate the adiabaticity condition. We also give
an efficient method for calculating the effective Rabi frequency (which is
related to the eigenvalues of Mathieu functions) in the quasi-Bragg regime.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper the motion of quantum particles with initial mass m is
investigated. The quantum mechanics equation is formulated and solved. It is
shown that the wave function contains the component which is depended on the
gravitation fine structure constant

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The structural properties of L-alanine amino acid in aqueous solution and in
crystalline phase have been studied by means of density-functional
electronic-structure and molecular dynamics simulations. The solvated
zwitterionic structure of L-alanine (+NH3-C2H4-COO-) was systematically
compared to the structure of its zwitterionic crystalline analogue acquired
from both computer simulations and experiments. It turns out that the
structural properties of an alanine molecule in aqueous solution can differ
significantly from those in crystalline phase, these differences being mainly
attributed to hydrogen bonding interactions. In particular, we found that the
largest difference between the two alanine forms can be seen for the
orientation and bond lengths of the carboxylate (COO-) group: in aqueous
solution the C-O bond lengths appear to strongly correlate with the number of
water molecules which form hydrogen bonds with the COO- group. Furthermore, the
hydrogen bond lengths are shorter and the hydrogen bond angles are larger for
L-alanine in water as compared to crystal. Overall, our findings strongly
suggest that the generally accepted approach of extending the structural
information acquired from crystallographic data to a L-alanine molecule in
aqueous solution should be used with caution.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.data-an
Abstract: We perform a quantitative analysis of extensive chess databases and show that
the frequencies of opening moves are distributed according to a power-law with
an exponent that increases linearly with the game depth, whereas the pooled
distribution of all opening weights follows Zipf's law with universal exponent.
We propose a simple stochastic process that is able to capture the observed
playing statistics and show that the Zipf law arises from the self-similar
nature of the game tree of chess. Thus, in the case of hierarchical
fragmentation the scaling is truly universal and independent of a particular
generating mechanism. Our findings are of relevance in general processes with
composite decisions.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: A computer-aided detection (CAD) system for the identification of pulmonary
nodules in low-dose multi-detector helical Computed Tomography (CT) images was
developed in the framework of the MAGIC-5 Italian project. One of the main
goals of this project is to build a distributed database of lung CT scans in
order to enable automated image analysis through a data and cpu GRID
infrastructure. The basic modules of our lung-CAD system, a dot-enhancement
filter for nodule candidate selection and a neural classifier for
false-positive finding reduction, are described. The system was designed and
tested for both internal and sub-pleural nodules. The results obtained on the
collected database of low-dose thin-slice CT scans are shown in terms of free
response receiver operating characteristic (FROC) curves and discussed.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: The nature of non-exponential kinetics in microbial cells inactivation by
pulsed electric fields (PEF) is discussed. It was demonstrated that possible
mechanism of non-exponential kinetics can be related to orientational disorder
in suspension of microbial cells of anisotropic form. A numerical studies of
spheroidal cell suspensions was carried out. The most pronounced deviations
from the exponential kinetics were observed for disordered suspensions of
prolate spheroids at small electric field strength $E$ or at large aspect ratio
$a$. For partially oriented suspensions, efficiency of inactivation enhances
with increasing of order parameter and field strength. A possibility of the
PEF-induced orientational ordering in microbial suspensions is discussed.

Categories: physics.space-ph, astro-ph
Abstract: We propose a criterion for identifying the orientation of the X-line when two
regions of plasma with arbitrary densities, temperatures, and magnetic fields
undergo reconnection. The X-line points in the direction that maximizes the
(suitably-defined) Alfv\'en speed characterizing the reconnection outflow. For
many situations a good approximation is that the X-line bisects the angle
formed by the magnetic fields.

Categories: physics.ao-ph
Abstract: Unconstrained CO2 emission from fossil fuel burning has been the dominant
cause of observed anthropogenic global warming. The amounts of "proven" and
potential fossil fuel reserves are uncertain and debated. Regardless of the
true values, society has flexibility in the degree to which it chooses to
exploit these reserves, especially unconventional fossil fuels and those
located in extreme or pristine environments. If conventional oil production
peaks within the next few decades, it may have a large effect on future
atmospheric CO2 and climate change, depending upon subsequent energy choices.
Assuming that proven oil and gas reserves do not greatly exceed estimates of
the Energy Information Administration, and recent trends are toward lower
estimates, we show that it is feasible to keep atmospheric CO2 from exceeding
about 450 ppm by 2100, provided that emissions from coal, unconventional fossil
fuels, and land use are constrained. Coal-fired power plants without
sequestration must be phased out before mid-century to achieve this CO2 limit.
It is also important to "stretch" conventional oil reserves via energy
conservation and efficiency, thus averting strong pressures to extract liquid
fuels from coal or unconventional fossil fuels while clean technologies are
being developed for the era "beyond fossil fuels". We argue that a rising price
on carbon emissions is needed to discourage conversion of the vast fossil
resources into usable reserves, and to keep CO2 beneath the 450 ppm ceiling.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Erwin Schrodinger (1939) proved that quantum wave functions coevolve with the
curved spacetime of the Friedmann universe. Schrodinger's derivation explains
the Hubble redshift of photons in an expanding universe, the energy changes of
moving particles, and establishes the coevolution of atoms and other quantum
systems with spacetime geometry. The assumption often made that small quantum
systems are isolated and that their properties remain constant as the Friedmann
universe evolves is incompatible with relativistic quantum mechanics and with
general relativity.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: By considering the structure of holococcoliths (calcite plates that cover
holococcolithophores, a haploid phase of the coccolithophore life cycle) as a
photonic structure, we apply a discrete dipolar approximation to study the
light backscattering properties of these algae. We show that some holococcolith
structures have the ability to scatter the ultraviolet (UV) radiation. This
property may represent an advantage for holococcolithophores possessing it, by
allowing them to live higher in the water column than other coccolithophores.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: How do blogs cite and influence each other? How do such links evolve? Does
the popularity of old blog posts drop exponentially with time? These are some
of the questions that we address in this work. Our goal is to build a model
that generates realistic cascades, so that it can help us with link prediction
and outlier detection.
  Blogs (weblogs) have become an important medium of information because of
their timely publication, ease of use, and wide availability. In fact, they
often make headlines, by discussing and discovering evidence about political
events and facts. Often blogs link to one another, creating a publicly
available record of how information and influence spreads through an underlying
social network. Aggregating links from several blog posts creates a directed
graph which we analyze to discover the patterns of information propagation in
blogspace, and thereby understand the underlying social network. Not only are
blogs interesting on their own merit, but our analysis also sheds light on how
rumors, viruses, and ideas propagate over social and computer networks.
  Here we report some surprising findings of the blog linking and information
propagation structure, after we analyzed one of the largest available datasets,
with 45,000 blogs and ~ 2.2 million blog-postings. Our analysis also sheds
light on how rumors, viruses, and ideas propagate over social and computer
networks. We also present a simple model that mimics the spread of information
on the blogosphere, and produces information cascades very similar to those
found in real life.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Comments on six papers published by S.P. Anjali Devi and R. Kandasamy in Heat
and Mass Transfer, ZAMM, Mechanics Research Communications, International
Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, Communications in Numerical Methods
in Engineering, Journal of Computational and Applied Mechanics
  In conclusion all the above papers are of very low quality, written without
care and are partly or completely wrong.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present the most accurate up-to-date theoretical values of the
{2p_{1/2}}-{2s} and {2p_{3/2}}-{2s} transition energies and the ground-state
hyperfine splitting in ${\rm Sc}^{18+}$. All two- and three-electron
contributions to the energy values up to the two-photon level are treated in
the framework of bound-state QED without $\aZ$-expansion. The interelectronic
interaction beyond the two-photon level is taken into account by means of the
large-scale configuration-interaction Dirac-Fock-Sturm (CI-DFS) method. The
relativistic recoil correction is calculated with many-electron wave functions
in order to take into account the electron-correlation effect. The accuracy of
the transition energy values is improved by a factor of five compared to the
previous calculations. The CI-DFS calculation of interelectronic-interaction
effects and the evaluation of the QED correction in an effective screening
potential provide significant improvement for the $2s$ hyperfine splitting. The
results obtained are in a good agreement with recently published experimental
data.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Parametric instabilities driven by partially coherent radiation in plasmas
are described by a generalized statistical Wigner-Moyal set of equations,
formally equivalent to the full wave equation, coupled to the plasma fluid
equations. A generalized dispersion relation for Stimulated Raman Scattering
driven by a partially coherent pump field is derived, revealing a growth rate
dependence, with the coherence width $\sigma$ of the radiation field, scaling
with $1/\sigma$ for backscattering (three-wave process), and with
$1/\sigma^{1/2}$ for direct forward scattering (four-wave process). Our results
demonstrate the possibility to control the growth rates of these instabilities
by properly using broadband pump radiation fields.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: This paper has been withdrawn by the authors due to a fatal error in the
analysis. The manuscript was submitted to Chemical Engineering Science. To
clarify the situation, we copy the main comment from an anonymous referee here:
"To my understanding, the authors analyze i = 1 ... 63 time series and
calculate their mean and standard deviation. These time series correspond to
individual, single ignition processes. Is this correct? If yes, these
processes, as Fig. 3 shows very clearly, are not stationary, and the pressure
difference (i.e., the signal) quickly decays to zero. In this case both the
mean and the standard deviation are poorly defined, for example because both
depend in a trivial fashion on the observation period T. I am not aware of any
study (including those cited by the authors) which allows for any conclusion
from such non-stationary signals. The results of Menezes and Barabasi are
strictly only valid for stationary time series, and they cannot be applied at
all in this case." We agree with this insightful comment that our data are not
stationary and the method adopted in our manuscript does not apply. We do not
see any possibility to correct this error and decide to withdraw it. We would
like to thank gratefully the referee and apologize for any inconvenience caused
by our oversight.

Categories: cond-mat.mes-hall, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The generator coordinate (GC) method is a variational approach to the quantum
many-body problem in which interacting many-body wave functions are constructed
as superpositions of (generally nonorthogonal) eigenstates of auxiliary
Hamiltonians containing a deformation parameter. This paper presents a
time-dependent extension of the GC method as a new approach to improve existing
approximations of the exchange-correlation (XC) potential in time-dependent
density-functional theory (TDDFT). The time-dependent GC method is shown to be
a conceptually and computationally simple tool to build memory effects into any
existing adiabatic XC potential. As an illustration, the method is applied to
driven parametric oscillations of two interacting electrons in a harmonic
potential (Hooke's atom). It is demonstrated that a proper choice of
time-dependent generator coordinates in conjunction with the adiabatic
local-density approximation reproduces the exact linear and nonlinear
two-electron dynamics quite accurately, including features associated with
double excitations that cannot be captured by TDDFT in the adiabatic
approximation.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: It is not uncommon, e.g. in the media, that specific groups are categorized
as being racist. Based on an extensive dataset of intermarriage statistics our
study questions the legitimacy of such characterizations. It suggests that, far
from being group-dependent, segregation mechanisms are instead
situation-dependent. More precisely, the degree of integration of a minority in
terms of the frequency of intermarriage is seen to crucially depend upon the
the proportion p of the minority. Thus, a population may have a segregative
behavior with respect to a high-p (p>20%) minority A and at the same time a
tolerant attitude toward a low-p (p<2%) minority B. This remains true even when
A and B represent the same minority; for instance Black-White intermarriage is
much more frequent in Montana than it is in South Carolina. In short, the
nature of minority groups is largely irrelevant, the key factor being their
proportion in a given area.

Categories: q-bio.PE, astro-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Medvedev and Melott (2007) have suggested that periodicity in fossil
biodiversity may be induced by cosmic rays which vary as the Solar System
oscillates normal to the galactic disk. We re-examine the evidence for a 62
million year (Myr) periodicity in biodiversity throughout the Phanerozoic
history of animal life reported by Rohde & Mueller (2005), as well as related
questions of periodicity in origination and extinction. We find that the signal
is robust against variations in methods of analysis, and is based on
fluctuations in the Paleozoic and a substantial part of the Mesozoic.
Examination of origination and extinction is somewhat ambiguous, with results
depending upon procedure. Origination and extinction intensity as defined by RM
may be affected by an artifact at 27 Myr in the duration of stratigraphic
intervals. Nevertheless, when a procedure free of this artifact is implemented,
the 27 Myr periodicity appears in origination, suggesting that the artifact may
ultimately be based on a signal in the data. A 62 Myr feature appears in
extinction, when this same procedure is used. We conclude that evidence for a
periodicity at 62 Myr is robust, and evidence for periodicity at approximately
27 Myr is also present, albeit more ambiguous.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We report an experimental observation of polaritonic optical bistability of
the laser emission in a planar semiconductor microcavity with a $100\AA$ GaAs
single quantum well in the strong-coupling regime. The bistability curves show
crossings that indicate a competition between a Kerr-like effect induced by the
polariton population and thermal effects. Associated with the bistability,
laser-like emission occurs at the bare cavity mode.

Categories: physics.ins-det, astro-ph
Abstract: The CERN Axion Solar Telescope (CAST) experiment searches for axions from the
Sun converted into photons with energies up to around 10 keV via the inverse
Primakoff effect in the high magnetic field of a superconducting Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) prototype magnet. A backside illuminated pn-CCD detector in
conjunction with an X-ray mirror optics is one of the three detectors used in
CAST to register the expected photon signal. Since this signal is very rare and
different background components (environmental gamma radiation, cosmic rays,
intrinsic radioactive impurities in the set-up, ...) entangle it, a detailed
study of the detector background has been undertaken with the aim to understand
and further reduce the background level of the detector. The analysis is based
on measured data taken during the Phase I of CAST and on Monte Carlo
simulations of different background components. This study will show that the
observed background level (at a rate of (8.00+-0.07)10^-5 counts/cm^2/s/keV
between 1 and 7 keV) seems to be dominated by the external gamma background due
to usual activities at the experimental site, while radioactive impurities in
the detector itself and cosmic neutrons could make just smaller contribution.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We propose a geometric growth model for weighted scale-free networks, which
is controlled by two tunable parameters. We derive exactly the main
characteristics of the networks, which are partially determined by the
parameters. Analytical results indicate that the resulting networks have
power-law distributions of degree, strength, weight and betweenness, a
scale-free behavior for degree correlations, logarithmic small average path
length and diameter with network size. The obtained properties are in agreement
with empirical data observed in many real-life networks, which shows that the
presented model may provide valuable insight into the real systems.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.other, physics.data-an
Abstract: In recent times there has been a surge of interest in seeking out patterns in
the aggregate behavior of socio-economic systems. One such domain is the
emergence of statistical regularities in the evolution of collective choice
from individual behavior. This is manifested in the sudden emergence of
popularity or "success" of certain ideas or products, compared to their
numerous, often very similar, competitors. In this paper, we present an
empirical study of a wide range of popularity distributions, spanning from
scientific paper citations to movie gross income. Our results show that in the
majority of cases, the distribution follows a log-normal form, suggesting that
multiplicative stochastic processes are the basis for emergence of popular
entities. This suggests the existence of some general principles of complex
organization leading to the emergence of popularity. We discuss the theoretical
principles needed to explain this socio-economic phenomenon, and present a
model for collective behavior that exhibits bimodality, which has been observed
in certain empirical popularity distributions.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Effective potentials of the relativistic m\alpha^6 order correction for the
ground state of the Coulomb two-center problem are calculated. They can be used
to evaluate the relativistic contribution of that order to the energies of
hydrogen molecular ions or metastable states of the antiprotonic helium atom,
where precision spectroscopic data are available. In our studies we use the
variational expansion based on randomly chosen exponents that permits to
achieve high numerical accuracy.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Density-functional theory requires ever better exchange-correlation (xc)
functionals for the ever more precise description of many-body effects on
electronic structure. Universal constraints on the xc energy are important
ingredients in the construction of improved functionals. Here we investigate
one such universal property of xc functionals: the Lieb-Oxford lower bound on
the exchange-correlation energy, $E_{xc}[n] \ge -C \int d^3r n^{4/3}$, where
$C\leq C_{LO}=1.68$. To this end, we perform a survey of available exact or
near-exact data on xc energies of atoms, ions, molecules, solids, and some
model Hamiltonians (the electron liquid, Hooke's atom and the Hubbard model).
All physically realistic density distributions investigated are consistent with
the tighter limit $C \leq 1$. For large classes of systems one can obtain
class-specific (but not fully universal) similar bounds. The Lieb-Oxford bound
with $C_{LO}=1.68$ is a key ingredient in the construction of modern xc
functionals, and a substantial change in the prefactor $C$ will have
consequences for the performance of these functionals.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: This letter presents principles and applications of a virtual multi-channel
lock-in amplifier that is a simple but effective method to recover small ac
signal from noise with high presison. The fundamentals of this method are based
on calculation of cross-correlation function. Via this method, we successfully
built up a magnetoelectric measurement system which can perform precise and
versatile measurements without any analog lock-in amplifier. Using the virtual
multi-channel lock-in amplifier, the output of the magnetoelectric measurement
system is extensively rich in magnetoelectric coupling behaviors, including
coupling strength and phase lag, under various dc bias magnetic field and ac
magnetic field.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper, it is shown that the cosmological model that was introduced in
a sequence of three earlier papers under the title, A Dust Universe Solution to
the Dark Energy Problem, can be used to resolve the problem of the great
mismatch of numerical values between dark energy from cosmology and zero point
energy from quantum theory. It is shown that, if the zero point energies for
the cosmic microwave background and for all the rest of the universe that is
not cosmic microwave background are introduced into this model as two entities,
their separate values appear within this theory in the form of a numerical
difference. It is this difference that gives the numerical value for the zero
point value of Einstein's dark energy density. Consequently, although the two
zero point energies may be large, their difference can give the known small
dark energy value from cosmology for dark energy density. Issues relating to
interpretation, calculation and measurement associated with this result and an
interpretation of dark energy as a measure of polarisation of the vacuum are
discussed. In the first appendix to this paper, problems associated with the
standard model of cosmology are solved by redefining temperature in the dust
universe model. In the second appendix of this paper, an examination of the
dark matter problem in relation to a general relativistic generalisation of
Newton's inverse square law is undertaken. In the third appendix to this paper,
the formalism is used to derive a formula that gives a possible value for the
mass of the universe in terms of Newton's gravitation constant, Einstein's
Lambda and the velocity of light. All three appendices have their own detailed
abstracts.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The space-time geometry is considered to be a physical geometry, i.e. a
geometry described completely by the world function. All geometrical concepts
and geometric objects are taken from the proper Euclidean geometry. They are
expressed via the Euclidean world function \sigma_E and declared to be concepts
and objects of any physical geometry, provided the Euclidean world function
\sigma_E is replaced by the world function \sigma of the physical geometry in
question. The set of physical geometries is more powerful, than the set of
Riemannian geometries, and one needs to choose a true space-time geometry. In
general, the physical geometry is multivariant (there are many vectors which
are equivalent to a given vector, but are not equivalent between themselves).
The multivariance admits one to describe quantum effects as geometric effects
and to consider existence of elementary particles as a geometrical problem,
when the possibility of the physical existence of an elementary geometric
object in the form of a physical body is determined by the space-time geometry.
Multivariance admits one to describe discrete and continuous geometries, using
the same technique. A use of physical geometry admits one to realize the
geometrical approach to the quantum theory and to the theory of elementary
particles.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Experimental and theoretical studies are presented related to the
ground-state magneto-optical resonance prepared in Cesium vapour confined in an
Extremely Thin Cell (ETC, with thickness equal to the wavelength of the
irradiating light). It is shown that the utilization of the ETC allows one to
examine the formation of a magneto-optical resonance on the individual
hyperfine transitions, thus distinguishing processes resulting in dark (reduced
absorption) or bright (enhanced absorption) resonance formation. We report on
an experimental evidence of the bright magneto-optical resonance sign reversal
in Cs atoms confined in the ETC. A theoretical model is proposed based on the
optical Bloch equations that involves the elastic interaction processes of
atoms in the ETC with its walls resulting in depolarization of the Cs excited
state which is polarized by the exciting radiation. This depolarization leads
to the sign reversal of the bright resonance. Using the proposed model, the
magneto-optical resonance amplitude and width as a function of laser power are
calculated and compared with the experimental ones. The numerical results are
in good agreement with the experiment.

Categories: hep-lat, hep-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The pseudoparticle approach is a numerical technique to compute path
integrals without discretizing spacetime. The basic idea is to integrate over
those field configurations, which can be represented by a sum of a fixed number
of localized building blocks (pseudoparticles). In a couple of previous papers
we have successfully applied the pseudoparticle approach to pure SU(2)
Yang-Mills theory. In this work we discuss how to incorporate fermionic fields
in the pseudoparticle approach. To test our method, we compute the phase
diagram of the 1+1-dimensional Gross-Neveu model in the large-N limit.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: We consider the stability of a porous medium submitted to a steady-state flow
with free-boundary. Assuming some hypotheses, it is possible to implement the
kinematic method by using an approximate pressure field bounding the true
pressure field from below. We are interested in finding such approximate
pressure fields and in proving that they bound the true pressure field from
below without knowing the true pressure field. We use fields which are
solutions of a problem with relaxed conditions with regard to the real problem.
Under a uniqueness condition of the solution of a weak formulation of the
problem, such fields are lower bounds for the true pressure field. Finally, we
give the example of a vertical dam.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: A new algorithm has been developed to compute low Mach Numbers supercritical
fluid flows. The algorithm is applied using a finite volume method based on the
SIMPLER algorithm. Its main advantages are to decrease significantly the CPU
time, and the possibility for supercritical fluid flow modelisation to use
other discretisation methods (such as spectral methods and/or finite
differences) and other algorithms such as PISO or projection. It makes it
possible to solve 3D problems within reasonable CPU time even when considering
complex equations of state. The algorithm is given after first a brief
description of the previously existing algorithm to solve for supercritical
fluids. The side and bottom heated near critical carbon dioxide filled cavity
problems are respectively solved and compared to the previously obtained
results.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: General relativity allows solutions exhibiting closed timelike curves. Time
travel generates paradoxes and quantum mechanics generalizations were proposed
to solve those paradoxes. The implications of self-consistent interactions on
acausal region of space-time are investigated. If the correspondence principle
is true, then all generalizations of quantum mechanics on acausal manifolds are
not renormalizable. Therefore quantum mechanics can only be defined on global
hyperbolic manifolds and all general relativity solutions exhibiting time
travel are unphysical.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In this paper we suggest a theoretical method based on the statistical
mechanics for treating the alpha-helix-random coil transition in alanine
polypeptides. We consider this process as a first-order phase transition and
develop a theory which is free of model parameters and is based solely on
fundamental physical principles. It describes essential thermodynamical
properties of the system such as heat capacity, the phase transition
temperature and others from the analysis of the polypeptide potential energy
surface calculated as a function of two dihedral angles, responsible for the
polypeptide twisting. The suggested theory is general and with some
modification can be applied for the description of phase transitions in other
complex molecular systems (e.g. proteins, DNA, nanotubes, atomic clusters,
fullerenes).

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In the present paper we present results of calculations obtained with the use
of the theoretical method described in our preceding paper [1] and perform
detail analysis of alpha helix-random coil transition in alanine polypeptides
of different length. We have calculated the potential energy surfaces of
polypeptides with respect to their twisting degrees of freedom and construct a
parameter-free partition function of the polypeptide using the suggested method
[1]. From the build up partition function we derive various thermodynamical
characteristics for alanine polypeptides of different length as a function of
temperature. Thus, we analyze the temperature dependence of the heat capacity,
latent heat and helicity for alanine polypeptides consisting of 21, 30, 40, 50
and 100 amino acids. Alternatively, we have obtained same thermodynamical
characteristics from the use of molecular dynamics simulations and compared
them with the results of the new statistical mechanics approach. The comparison
proves the validity of the statistical mechanic approach and establishes its
accuracy.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, nlin.PS, physics.space-ph
Abstract: We wish to transmit messages to and from a hypersonic vehicle around which a
plasma sheath has formed. For long distance transmission, the signal carrying
these messages must be necessarily low frequency, typically 2 GHz, to which the
plasma sheath is opaque. The idea is to use the plasma properties to make the
plasma sheath appear transparent.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The structure of the unnatural parity states of PsH, LiPs, NaPs and KPs are
investigated with the configuration interaction and stochastic variational
methods. The binding energies (in hartree) are found to be 8.17x10-4,
4.42x10-4, 15.14x10-4 and 21.80x10-4 respectively. These states are constructed
by first coupling the two electrons into a configuration which is predominantly
3Pe, and then adding a p-wave positron. All the active particles are in states
in which the relative angular momentum between any pair of particles is at
least L = 1. The LiPs state is Borromean since there are no 3-body bound
subsystems (of the correct symmetry) of the (Li+, e-, e-, e+) particles that
make up the system. The dominant decay mode of these states will be radiative
decay into a configuration that autoionizes or undergoes positron annihilation.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Surface based geometries of microfabricated wires or patterned magnetic films
can be used to magnetically trap and manipulate ultracold neutral atoms or
Bose-Einstein condensates. We investigate the magnetic properties of such atom
chips using a scanning magnetoresistive (MR) microscope with high spatial
resolution and high field sensitivity. We show that MR sensors are ideally
suited to observe small variations of the magnetic field caused by
imperfections in the wires or magnetic materials which ultimately lead to
fragmentation of ultracold atom clouds. Measurements are also provided for the
magnetic field produced by a thin current-carrying wire with small geometric
modulations along the edge. Comparisons of our measurements with a full numeric
calculation of the current flow in the wire and the subsequent magnetic field
show excellent agreement. Our results highlight the use of scanning MR
microscopy as a convenient and powerful technique for precisely characterizing
the magnetic fields produced near the surface of atom chips.

Categories: nlin.CD, math-ph, math.DS, math.MP, math.SG, physics.acc-ph, physics.class-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We investigate the detailed dynamics of multidimensional Hamiltonian systems
by studying the evolution of volume elements formed by unit deviation vectors
about their orbits. The behavior of these volumes is strongly influenced by the
regular or chaotic nature of the motion, the number of deviation vectors, their
linear (in)dependence and the spectrum of Lyapunov exponents. The different
time evolution of these volumes can be used to identify rapidly and efficiently
the nature of the dynamics, leading to the introduction of quantities that
clearly distinguish between chaotic behavior and quasiperiodic motion on
$N$-dimensional tori. More specifically we introduce the Generalized Alignment
Index of order $k$ (GALI$_k$) as the volume of a generalized parallelepiped,
whose edges are $k$ initially linearly independent unit deviation vectors from
the studied orbit whose magnitude is normalized to unity at every time step.
The GALI$_k$ is a generalization of the Smaller Alignment Index (SALI)
(GALI$_2$ $\propto$ SALI). However, GALI$_k$ provides significantly more
detailed information on the local dynamics, allows for a faster and clearer
distinction between order and chaos than SALI and works even in cases where the
SALI method is inconclusive.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, nlin.PS, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We show that the van der Waals-like phase separation instability of a driven
granular gas at zero gravity, previously investigated in two-dimensional
settings, persists in three dimensions. We consider a monodisperse granular gas
driven by a thermal wall of a three-dimensional rectangular container at zero
gravity. The basic steady state of this system, as described by granular
hydrodynamic equations, involves a denser and colder layer of granulate located
at the wall opposite to the driving wall. When the inelastic energy loss is
sufficiently high, the driven granular gas exhibits, in some range of average
densities, negative compressibility in the directions parallel to the driving
wall. When the lateral dimensions of the container are sufficiently large, the
negative compressibility causes spontaneous symmetry breaking of the basic
steady state and a phase separation instability. Event-driven molecular
dynamics simulations confirm and complement our theoretical predictions.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.data-an
Abstract: We address the role of multiplicative stochastic processes in modeling the
occurrence of power-law city size distributions. As an explanation of the
result of Zipf's rank analysis, Simon's model is presented in a mathematically
elementary way, with a thorough discussion of the involved hypotheses. Emphasis
is put on the flexibility of the model, as to its possible extensions and the
relaxation of some strong assumptions. We point out some open problems
regarding the prediction of the detailed shape of Zipf's rank plots, which may
be tackled by means of such extensions.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We consider a stiff polymer chain in poor solvent and apply a force at one
end of the chain. We find that by varying the stiffness parameter, polymer
undergoes a transition from the globule state to the folded like state. The
conformation of folded state mimics the $\beta$-sheet as seen in titin
molecule. Using exact enumeration technique, we study the extension-force and
force-temperature diagrams of such a system. Force-temperature diagram shows
the re-entrance behaviour for flexible chain. However, for stiff chain this
re-entrance behaviour is absent and there is an enhancement in
$\theta$-temperature with the rise of stiffness. We further propose that the
internal information about the frozen structure of polymer can be read from the
distribution of end-to-end distance which shows saw-tooth like behaviour.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: The onset of an "eye-phase" and its role during the DNA unzipping is studied
when a force is applied to the interior of the chain. The directionality of the
hydrogen bond introduced here shows oscillations in force-extension curve
similar to a "saw-tooth" kind of oscillations seen in the protein unfolding
experiments. The effects of intermediates (hairpins) and stacking energies on
the melting profile have also been discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Relativistic self-consistent-field calculations of the radial hyperfine
integrals have been performed in the 4d-shell element ions. The comparison with
available experimental results gives an estimate of configuration interaction
effects in the hyperfine interaction in these ions. The results can also be
used to derive nuclear moments from laserspectroscopic measurements of
radioactive isotopes.
  PACS Numbers: 31.15.Ne, 31.30.Gs, 32.10.Fn

Categories: physics.ao-ph
Abstract: In the framework of the model inter-comparison study - Asia Phase II (MICS2),
where eight models are compared over East Asia, this paper studies the
influence of different parameterizations used in the aerosol module on the
aerosol concentrations of sulfate and nitrate in PM10. An intracomparison of
aerosol concentrations is done for March 2001 using different configurations of
the aerosol module of one of the model used for the intercomparison. Single
modifications of a reference setup for model configurations are performed and
compared to a reference case. These modifications concern the size
distribution, i.e. the number of sections, and physical processes, i.e.
coagulation, condensation/evaporation, cloud chemistry, heterogeneous reactions
and sea-salt emissions. Comparing monthly averaged concentrations at different
stations, the importance of each parameterization is first assessed. It is
found that sulfate concentrations are little sensitive to sea-salt emissions
and to whether condensation is computed dynamically or by assuming
thermodynamic equilibrium. Nitrate concentrations are little sensitive to cloud
chemistry. However, a very high sensitivity to heterogeneous reactions is
observed. Thereafter, the variability of the aerosol concentrations to the use
of different chemistry transport models (CTMs) and the variability to the use
of different parameterizations in the aerosol module are compared. For sulfate,
the variability to the use of different parameterizations in the aerosol module
is lower than the variability to the use of different CTMs. However, for
nitrate, for monthly averaged concentrations averaged over four stations, these
two variabilities have the same order of magnitude.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The unbinding process of a protein-ligand complex of major biological
interest was investigated by means of a computational approach at atomistic
classical mechanical level. An energy minimisation-based technique was used to
determine the dissociation paths of the system by probing only a relevant set
of generalized coordinates. The complex problem was reduced to a
low-dimensional scanning along a selected distance between the protein and the
ligand. Orientational coordinates of the escaping fragment (the ligand) were
also assessed in order to further characterise the unbinding. Solvent effects
were accounted for by means of the Poisson--Boltzmann continuum model. The
corresponding dissociation time was derived from the calculated barrier height,
in compliance with the experimentally reported Arrhenius-like behaviour. The
computed results are in good agreement with the available experimental data.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Recently, the collisionless expansion of spherical nanoplasmas has been
analyzed with a new ergodic model, clarifying the transition from
hydrodynamic-like to Coulomb-explosion regimes, and providing accurate laws for
the relevant features of the phenomenon. A complete derivation of the model is
here presented. The important issue of the self-consistent initial conditions
is addressed by analyzing the initial charging transient due to the electron
expansion, in the approximation of immobile ions. A comparison among different
kinetic models for the expansion is presented, showing that the ergodic model
provides a simplified description, which retains the essential information on
the electron distribution, in particular, the energy spectrum. Results are
presented for a wide range of initial conditions (determined from a single
dimensionless parameter), in excellent agreement with calculations from the
exact Vlasov-Poisson theory, thus providing a complete and detailed
characterization of all the stages of the expansion.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A general {\it ab-initio} and non-perturbative method to solve the
time-dependent Schr\"odinger equation (TDSE) for the interaction of a strong
attosecond laser pulse with a general atom, i.e., beyond the models of
quasi-one-electron or quasi-two-electron targets, is described. The field-free
Hamiltonian and the dipole matrices are generated using a flexible $B$-spline
$R$-matrix method. This numerical implementation enables us to construct
term-dependent, non-orthogonal sets of one-electron orbitals for the bound and
continuum electrons. The solution of the TDSE is propagated in time using the
Arnoldi-Lanczos method, which does not require the diagonalization of any large
matrices. The method is illustrated by an application to the multi-photon
excitation and ionization of Ne atoms. Good agreement with $R$-matrix Floquet
calculations for the generalized cross sections for two-photon ionization is
achieved.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: A specific, genuinely three-dimensional mechanism of rogue wave formation, in
a late stage of the modulational instability of a perturbed Stokes deep-water
wave, is recognized through numerical experiments. The simulations are based on
fully nonlinear equations describing weakly three-dimensional potential flows
of an ideal fluid with a free surface in terms of conformal variables.
Spontaneous formation of zigzag patterns for wave amplitude is observed in a
nonlinear stage of the instability. If initial wave steepness is sufficiently
high ($ka>0.06$), these coherent structures produce rogue waves. The most tall
waves appear in ``turns'' of the zigzags. For $ka<0.06$, the structures decay
typically without formation of steep waves.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, astro-ph.EP
Abstract: In this study, three empirical Free Core Nutation (FCN) models developed to
the present time, MHB2000, Malkin's and Lambert's ones, are compared on the
basis of representation of variations of the FCN amplitude and phase predicted
by these models. It is possible to conclude, that the model of the author
provides the most realistic representation of the FCN variations. However, the
specified models are based on representation about single FCN rotational mode.
At the same time, some results of processing of the VLBI observations made
during last years, specify possible presence of two close FCN periods. A
theoretical explanation to presence of a second FCN frequency FCN has been
given by G. Krasinsky in his theory of rotation of the Earth with two-layer
liquid core, ERA2005. In the present work, for more detailed studying this
phenomenon, the IVS time series of celestial pole offset, and also those
predicted by the ERA2005 theory, have been investigated by means of several
statistical methods which confidently show presence of two fluctuations in
nutational movement of an Earth's rotation axis with the periods about -452 and
-410 solar days.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Forward time step integrators are splitting algorithms with only positive
splitting coefficients. When used in solving physical evolution equations,
these positive coefficients correspond to positive time steps. Forward
algorithms are essential for solving time-irreversible equations that cannot be
evolved using backward time steps. However, forward integrators are also better
in solving time-reversible equations of classical dynamics by tracking as
closely as possible the physical trajectory. This work compares in detail
various forward and non-forward fourth-order integrators using three, fourth,
five and six force evaluations. In the case of solving the 2D Kepler orbit, all
non-forward integrators are optimized by simply minimizing the size of their
backward time steps.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Some arguments in favour of the existence of tachyons and extensions of the
Lorentz Group are presented. On the former, it is observed that with a slight
modification to standard electromagnetic theory a single superluminal charge
will bind to itself in a self-sustaining circular orbit, suggestive of a
(modified) electromagnetic interpretation of the strong force. Symmetries in
that theory are used in the subsequent analysis as a starting point in the
search for physically-motivated extensions of the Lorentz Group. There is some
discussion of the validity of imaginary coordinates in superluminal
transformations of frame. The article concludes with some speculation on the
implications for faster-than light travel.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: This paper follows in the tradition of direct-action versions of
electromagnetism having the aim of avoiding a balance of infinities wherein a
mechanical mass offsets an infinite electromagnetic mass so as to arrive at a
finite observed value. Given that, in this respect the direct-action approached
ultimately failed because its initial exclusion of self-action was found to be
untenable in the relativistic domain, this paper continues the tradition
considering instead a version of electromagnetism wherein mechanical action is
excluded and self-action is retained. It is shown that the resulting theory is
effectively interacting due to the presence of infinite forces. A vehicle for
the investigation is a pair of classical point charges in a positronium-like
arrangement for which the orbits are found to be self-sustaining and naturally
quantized.

Categories: physics.med-ph, q-bio.NC
Abstract: The present paper aims at introducing the innovative technologies, based on
the concept of "sensory substitution" or "perceptual supplementation", we are
developing in the fields of human disability and biomedical engineering.
Precisely, our goal is to design, develop and validate practical assistive
biomedical and/technical devices and/or rehabilitating procedures for persons
with disabilities, using artificial tongue-placed tactile biofeedback systems.
Proposed applications are dealing with: (1) pressure sores prevention in case
of spinal cord injuries (persons with paraplegia, or tetraplegia); (2) ankle
proprioceptive acuity improvement for driving assistance in older and/or
disabled adults; and (3) balance control improvement to prevent fall in older
and/or disabled adults. This paper presents results of three feasibility
studies performed on young healthy adults.

Categories: cs.IR, cond-mat.stat-mech, cs.CY, physics.data-an
Abstract: We analyze a large-scale snapshot of del.icio.us and investigate how the
number of different tags in the system grows as a function of a suitably
defined notion of time. We study the temporal evolution of the global
vocabulary size, i.e. the number of distinct tags in the entire system, as well
as the evolution of local vocabularies, that is the growth of the number of
distinct tags used in the context of a given resource or user. In both cases,
we find power-law behaviors with exponents smaller than one. Surprisingly, the
observed growth behaviors are remarkably regular throughout the entire history
of the system and across very different resources being bookmarked. Similar
sub-linear laws of growth have been observed in written text, and this
qualitative universality calls for an explanation and points in the direction
of non-trivial cognitive processes in the complex interaction patterns
characterizing collaborative tagging.

Categories: nucl-ex, hep-ex, physics.atom-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: ALPHA is an international project that has recently begun experimentation at
CERN's Antiproton Decelerator (AD) facility. The primary goal of ALPHA is
stable trapping of cold antihydrogen atoms with the ultimate goal of precise
spectroscopic comparisons with hydrogen. We discuss the status of the ALPHA
project and the prospects for antihydrogen trapping.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: This paper introduces the concept of symbolic sensor as an extension of the
smart sensor one. Then, the links between the physical world and the symbolic
one are introduced. The creation of symbols is proposed within the frame of the
pretopology theory. In order to adapt the sensor to the measurement context, a
learning process has been used to provide an adaptive interpretation of the
measurement. Finally, an example is presented in the case of a temperature
measurement.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Several theories for weakly damped free-surface flows have been formulated.
In this paper we use the linear approximation to the Navier-Stokes equations to
derive a new set of equations for potential flow which include dissipation due
to viscosity. A viscous correction is added not only to the irrotational
pressure (Bernoulli's equation), but also to the kinematic boundary condition.
The nonlinear Schr\"odinger (NLS) equation that one can derive from the new set
of equations to describe the modulations of weakly nonlinear, weakly damped
deep-water gravity waves turns out to be the classical damped version of the
NLS equation that has been used by many authors without rigorous justification.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: This paper deals with sensors which compute and report linguistic assessments
of their values.Such sensors, called symbolic sensors are a natural extension
of smart ones when working with control systems which use artificial
intelligence based technics. After having recalled the smart sensor concepts,
this paper introduces the symbolic sensor ones. Links between the physical
world and the symbolic one are described. It is then shown how Zadeh's
approximate reasoning theory provides a smart way to implement symbolic
sensors. Finally, since the symbolic sensor is a general component, a
functional adaptation to the measurement context is proposed.

Categories: physics.med-ph, q-bio.NC
Abstract: Pressure ulcers are recognized as a major health issue in individuals with
spinal cord injuries and new approaches to prevent this pathology are
necessary. An innovative health strategy is being developed through the use of
computer and sensory substitution via the tongue in order to compensate for the
sensory loss in the buttock area for individuals with paraplegia. This sensory
compensation will enable individuals with spinal cord injuries to be aware of a
localized excess of pressure at the skin/seat interface and, consequently, will
enable them to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers by relieving the
cutaneous area of suffering. This work reports an initial evaluation of this
approach and the feasibility of creating an adapted behavior, with a change in
pressure as a response to electro-stimulated information on the tongue.
Obtained during a clinical study in 10 healthy seated subjects, the first
results are encouraging, with 92% success in 100 performed tests. These
results, which have to be completed and validated in the paraplegic population,
may lead to a new approach to education in health to prevent the formation of
pressure ulcers within this population. Keywords: Spinal Cord Injuries,
Pressure Ulcer, Sensory Substitution, Health Education, Biomedical Informatics.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Multicanonical molecular dynamics (MD) is a powerful technique for sampling
conformations on rugged potential surfaces such as protein. However, it is
notoriously difficult to estimate the multicanonical temperature effectively.
Wang and Landau developed a convenient method for estimating the density of
states based on a multicanonical Monte Carlo method. In their method, the
density of states is calculated autonomously during a simulation. In this paper
we develop a set of techniques to effectively apply the Wang-Landau method to
MD simulations. In the multicanonical MD, the estimation of the derivative of
the density of states is critical. In order to estimate it accurately, we
devise two original improvements. First, the correction for the density of
states is made smooth by using the Gaussian distribution obtained by a short
canonical simulation. Second, an approximation is applied to the derivative,
which is based on the Gaussian distribution and the multiple weighted histogram
technique. A test of this method was performed with small polypeptides,
Met-enkephalin and Trp-cage, and it is demonstrated that Wang-Landau MD is
consistent with replica exchange MD but can sample much larger conformational
space.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We investigate the behaviour of an original traffic model. The model
considers a single multi-lane street, populated by autonomous vehicles directed
from either end to the other. Lanes have no intrinsic directionality, and the
vehicles are inserted at random at either end and any lane. Collision avoidance
is fully automatic and, to enhance the transport capacity of the street,
vehicles form_trains_ in which they may travel at high speed quite close to the
vehicle in front.
  We report on the transit times for vehicles under a wide variety of
conditions: vehicle insertion probability & imbalance and their maximum speed
distribution. We also outline an interesting feature of the model, that the
complex interactions of many vehicles are considerably more powerful than a
simple "keep left" directive which each vehicle should obey.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: The harmonic emission from cluster nanoplasmas subject to short, intense
infrared laser pulses is analyzed by means of particle-in-cell simulations. A
pronounced resonant enhancement of the low-order harmonic yields is found when
the Mie plasma frequency of the ionizing and expanding cluster resonates with
the respective harmonic frequency. We show that a strong, nonlinear resonant
coupling of the cluster electrons with the laser field inhibits coherent
electron motion, suppressing the emitted radiation and restricting the spectrum
to only low-order harmonics. A pump-probe scheme is suggested to monitor the
ionization dynamics of the expanding clusters.

Categories: physics.space-ph
Abstract: We have performed a simulation study of Langmuir turbulence in the Earth's
ionosphere by means of a Zakharov model with parameters relevant for the F
layer. The model includes dissipative terms to model collisions and Landau
damping of the electrons and ions, and a linear density profile, which models
the ionospheric plasma inhomogeneity whose length scale is of the order 10--100
km. The injection of energy into the system is modeled by a constant source
term in the Zakharov equation. Langmuir turbulence is excited ``on-demand'' in
controlled ionospheric modification experiments where the energy is provided by
an HF radio beam injected into the overhead ionospheric plasma. The ensuing
turbulence can be studied with radars and in the form of secondary radiation
recorded by ground-based receivers. We have analyzed spectral signatures of the
turbulence for different sets of parameters and different altitudes relative to
the turning point of the linear Langmuir mode where the Langmuir frequency
equals the local plasma frequency. By a parametric analysis, we have derived a
simple scaling law, which links the spectral width of the turbulent frequency
spectrum to the physical parameters in the ionosphere. The scaling law provides
a quantitative relation between the physical parameters (temperatures, electron
number density, ionospheric length scale, etc.) and the observed frequency
spectrum. This law may be useful for interpreting experimental results.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We analyze several possibilities for precisely measuring electronic
transitions in atomic helium by the direct use of phase-stabilized femtosecond
frequency combs. Because the comb is self-calibrating and can be shifted into
the ultraviolet spectral region via harmonic generation, it offers the prospect
of greatly improved accuracy for UV and far-UV transitions. To take advantage
of this accuracy an ultracold helium sample is needed. For measurements of the
triplet spectrum a magneto-optical trap (MOT) can be used to cool and trap
metastable 2^3S state atoms. We analyze schemes for measuring the two-photon
$2^3S \to 4^3S$ interval, and for resonant two-photon excitation to high
Rydberg states, $2^3S \to 3^3P \to n^3S,D$. We also analyze experiments on the
singlet-state spectrum. To accomplish this we propose schemes for producing and
trapping ultracold helium in the 1^1S or 2^1S state via intercombination
transitions. A particularly intriguing scenario is the possibility of measuring
the $1^1S \to 2^1S$ transition with extremely high accuracy by use of
two-photon excitation in a magic wavelength trap that operates identically for
both states. We predict a ``triple magic wavelength'' at 412 nm that could
facilitate numerous experiments on trapped helium atoms, because here the
polarizabilities of the 1^1S, 2^1S and 2^3S states are all similar, small, and
positive.

Categories: cond-mat.supr-con, nucl-th, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: The symmetric heavy-light ansatz is a method for finding the ground state of
any dilute unpolarized system of attractive two-component fermions.
Operationally it can be viewed as a generalization of the Kohn-Sham equations
in density functional theory applied to N-body density correlations. While the
original Hamiltonian has an exact Z_2 symmetry, the heavy-light ansatz breaks
this symmetry by skewing the mass ratio of the two components. In the limit
where one component is infinitely heavy, the many-body problem can be solved in
terms of single-particle orbitals. The original Z_2 symmetry is recovered by
enforcing Z_2 symmetry as a constraint on N-body density correlations for the
two components. For the 1D, 2D, and 3D attractive Hubbard models the method is
in very good agreement with exact Lanczos calculations for few-body systems at
arbitrary coupling. For the 3D attractive Hubbard model there is very good
agreement with lattice Monte Carlo results for many-body systems in the limit
of infinite scattering length.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Image and video quality in Long Range Observation Systems (LOROS) suffer from
atmospheric turbulence that causes small neighbourhoods in image frames to
chaotically move in different directions and substantially hampers visual
analysis of such image and video sequences. The paper presents a real-time
algorithm for perfecting turbulence degraded videos by means of stabilization
and resolution enhancement. The latter is achieved by exploiting the turbulent
motion. The algorithm involves generation of a reference frame and estimation,
for each incoming video frame, of a local image displacement map with respect
to the reference frame; segmentation of the displacement map into two classes:
stationary and moving objects and resolution enhancement of stationary objects,
while preserving real motion. Experiments with synthetic and real-life
sequences have shown that the enhanced videos, generated in real time, exhibit
substantially better resolution and complete stabilization for stationary
objects while retaining real motion.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: Author offers and researched the new and revolutionary inflatable
electrostatic AB space towers (mast, new space elevator) up to one hundred
twenty thousands kilometers (or more) in height. The main innovation is filling
the tower by electron gas, which can create pressure up one atmosphere, has
negligible small weight and surprising properties.
  The suggested mast has following advantages in comparison with conventional
space elevator: 1. Electrostatic AB tower may be built from Earth surface
without the employment of any rockets. That decreases the cost of electrostatic
mast by thousands of times. 2. One can have any height and has a big control
load capacity. 3. Electrostatic tower can have the height of a geosynchronous
orbit (36,000 km) WITHOUT the additional top cable as the space elevator (up
120,000 - 160,000 km) and counterweight (equalizer) of hundreds of tons. 4. The
offered mast has less total mass than conventional space elevator. 5. The
offered tower can have the high-speed electrostatic climbers moved by
high-voltage electricity from Earth's surface. 6. The electrostatic mast can
bend in any needed direction when we give the necessary electric voltage in the
required parts of the extended mast. 7. Control mast has stability for any
altitude. Three projects 100 km, 36,000km (GEO), 120,000 km are computed and
presented.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: A new method to coherently control the electron dynamics is proposed using a
few-cycle laser pulse in combination with a controlling field. It is shown that
this method not only broadens the attosecond pulse bandwidth, but also reduces
the chirp, then an isolated 80-as pulse is straightforwardly obtained and even
shorter pulse is achievable by increasing the intensity of the controlling
field. Such ultrashort pulses allow one to investigate ultrafast electronic
processes which have never be achieved before. In addition, the few-cycle
synthesized pulse is expected to manipulate a wide range of laser-atom
interactions.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In analogy with the load and the metage in hydrodynamics, we define
magnetohydrodynamic load and magnetohydrodynamic metage in the case of
magnetofluids. They can be used to write the magnetic field in MHD in Clebsch's
form. We show how these two concepts can be utilised to derive the magnetic
analogue of the Ertel's theorem and also, how in the presence of non-trivial
topology of the magnetic field in the magnetofluid one may associate the
linking number of the magnetic field lines with the invariant MHD loads. The
paper illustrates that the symmetry translation of the MHD metage in the
corresponding label space generates the conservation of cross helicity.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The CALICE collaboration is presently constructing a test hadron calorimeter
(HCAL) with 7620 scintillator tiles read out by novel photo-detectors - Silicon
Photomultipliers (SiPMs). This prototype is the first device which uses SiPMs
on a large scale. We present the design of the HCAL and report on measured
properties of more than 10 thousand SiPMs. We discuss the SiPM efficiency,
gain, cross-talk, and noise rate dependence on bias voltage and temperature,
including the spread in these parameters. We analyze the reasons for SiPM
rejection and present the results of the long term stability studies. The first
measurements of the SiPM radiation hardness are presented. We compare
properties of SiPM with the properties of similar devices, MRS APD and MPPC. A
possibility to make the tiles thinner and to read them out without WLS fibers
has been studied.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We proved that under quantum mechanics a momentum-energy and a space-time are
dual vector spaces on an almost complex manifold in position representation,
and the minimal uncertainty relations are equivalent to the inner-product
relations of their bases. In a microscopic sense, there exist locally a
momentum-energy conservation and a space-time conservation. The minimal
uncertainty relations refer to a local equilibrium state for a stable system,
and the relations will be invariable in the special relativity. A supposition
about something having dark property is proposed, which relates to a breakdown
of time symmetry.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In this paper a lattice model for diffusional transport of particles in the
interphase cell nucleus is proposed. Dense networks of chromatin fibers are
created by three different methods: randomly distributed, non-interconnected
obstacles, a random walk chain model, and a self avoiding random walk chain
model with persistence length. By comparing a discrete and a continuous version
of the random walk chain model, we demonstrate that lattice discretization does
not alter particle diffusion. The influence of the 3D geometry of the fiber
network on the particle diffusion is investigated in detail, while varying
occupation volume, chain length, persistence length and walker size. It is
shown that adjacency of the monomers, the excluded volume effect incorporated
in the self avoiding random walk model, and, to a lesser extent, the
persistence length, affect particle diffusion. It is demonstrated how the
introduction of the effective chain occupancy, which is a convolution of the
geometric chain volume with the walker size, eliminates the conformational
effects of the network on the diffusion, i.e., when plotting the diffusion
coefficient as a function of the effective chain volume, the data fall onto a
master curve.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Trapping and cooling techniques have become very important for many
fundamental experiments in atomic physics. When applied to highly charged ions
confined in Penning traps, these procedures are very effective for testing
quantum electrodynamics in extreme electromagnetic fields produced by heavy
highly charged ions such as uranium U$^{91+}$. In addition, fundamental
constants or nuclear ground state properties can be determined with high
accuracy in these simple systems. Finally, by studying a single trapped
radioactive ion, its nuclear decay can be studied in detail by observing the
disappearance of the signal of the mother and the appearance of that of the
daughter isotope. Such experiments on highly charged ions at extremely low
energy will become possible by the HITRAP facility which is currently being
built up at GSI. Also the future Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research
(FAIR) will be briefly described which is expected to be operational by 2014.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We theoretically discuss how to tune the competition between Forster transfer
and spontaneous emission in a continuous and nondestructive fashion. The
proposed approach is especially suitable for delicate biological systems like
light harvesting complexes and fluorescent protein oligomers. We demonstrate
that the manipulation of the density of photonic states at the emission
frequency of the energy donor results in a change of the quantum efficiencies
of the competing energy transfer and spontaneous emission processes. This
change will be manifested in a modification of the donor and acceptor emission
intensities. Thus, by controlling the local density of photonic states Forster
coupled systems can be manipulated and analyzed without the need to physically
separate donor and acceptor chromophores for individual analysis, which is of
interest, for example, for oligomeric reef coral fluorescent proteins.

Categories: q-bio.NC, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The organization of the connectivity between mammalian cortical areas has
become a major subject of study, because of its important role in scaffolding
the macroscopic aspects of animal behavior and intelligence. In this study we
present a computational reconstruction approach to the problem of network
organization, by considering the topological and spatial features of each area
in the primate cerebral cortex as subsidy for the reconstruction of the global
cortical network connectivity. Starting with all areas being disconnected,
pairs of areas with similar sets of features are linked together, in an attempt
to recover the original network structure. Inferring primate cortical
connectivity from the properties of the nodes, remarkably good reconstructions
of the global network organization could be obtained, with the topological
features allowing slightly superior accuracy to the spatial ones. Analogous
reconstruction attempts for the C. elegans neuronal network resulted in
substantially poorer recovery, indicating that cortical area interconnections
are relatively stronger related to the considered topological and spatial
properties than neuronal projections in the nematode. The close relationship
between area-based features and global connectivity may hint on developmental
rules and constraints for cortical networks. Particularly, differences between
the predictions from topological and spatial properties, together with the
poorer recovery resulting from spatial properties, indicate that the
organization of cortical networks is not entirely determined by spatial
constraints.

Categories: physics.optics, cond-mat.mes-hall, quant-ph
Abstract: We present an experimental study of the dynamics underlying the buildup and
decay of dynamical nuclear spin polarization in a single semiconductor quantum
dot. Our experiment shows that the nuclei can be polarized on a time scale of a
few milliseconds, while their decay dynamics depends drastically on external
parameters. We show that a single electron can very efficiently depolarize the
nuclear spins and discuss two processes that can cause this depolarization.
Conversely, in the absence of a quantum dot electron, the lifetime of nuclear
spin polarization is on the time scale of a second, most likely limited by the
non-secular terms of the nuclear dipole-dipole interaction. We can further
suppress this depolarization rate by 1-2 orders of magnitude by applying an
external magnetic field exceeding 1 mT.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Many practical applications exploit an external local magnetic field --
magnetic obstacle -- as an essential part of their constructions. Recently, it
has been demonstrated that the flow of an electrically conducting fluid
influenced by an external field can show several kinds of recirculation. The
present paper reports a 3D numerical study whose some results are compared with
an experiment about such a flow in a rectangular duct.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The purpose of this comment is first to correct a misapprehension of the role
played by composite wave diffraction on surface-wave generation at
subwavelength structures and second to point out that periodic Bloch structures
are unnecessary for the efficient production of the surface plasmon polariton
(SPP) guided mode either as traveling or standing waves. Guided surface waves
originate from simple slit or groove edges illuminated under normal incidence,
and one-dimensional (1-D) surface cavities from these standing waves are easily
realized.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: This paper compares the performance of artificial neural networks and boosted
decision trees, with and without cascade training, for tagging b-jets in a
collider experiment. It is shown, using a Monte Carlo simulation of $WH \to
l\nu q\bar{q}$ events, that for a b-tagging efficiency of 50%, the light jet
rejection power given by boosted decision trees without cascade training is
about 55% higher than that given by artificial neural networks. The cascade
training technique can improve the performance of boosted decision trees and
artificial neural networks at this b-tagging efficiency level by about 35% and
80% respectively. We conclude that the cascade trained boosted decision trees
method is the most promising technique for tagging heavy flavours at collider
experiments.

Categories: math-ph, math.AP, math.MP, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The memory effects on microscopic kinetic systems have been sometimes
modelled by means of the introduction of second order time derivatives in the
macroscopic hydrodynamic equations. One prototypical example is the hyperbolic
modification of the Burgers equation, that has been introduced to clarify the
interplay of hyperbolicity and nonlinear hydrodynamic evolution. Previous
studies suggested the finite time blow-up of this equation, and here we present
a rigorous proof of this fact.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Current methods for producing single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) lead to
heterogeneous samples containing mixtures of metallic and semiconducting
species with a variety of lengths and defects. Optical detection at the single
nanotube level should thus offer the possibility to examine these
heterogeneities provided that both SWNT species are equally well detected.
Here, we used photothermal heterodyne detection to record absorption images and
spectra of individual SWNTs. Because this photothermal method relies only on
light absorption, it readily detects metallic nanotubes as well as the emissive
semiconducting species. The first and second optical transitions in individual
semicontucting nanotubes have been probed. Comparison between the emission and
absorption spectra of the lowest-lying optical transition reveal mainly small
Stokes shifts. Side bands in the near-infrared absorption spectra are observed
and assigned to exciton-phonon bound states. No such sidebands are detected
around the lowest transition of metallic nanotubes.

Categories: q-bio.QM, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.MN
Abstract: The properties of certain networks are determined by hidden variables that
are not explicitly measured. The conditional probability (propagator) that a
vertex with a given value of the hidden variable is connected to k of other
vertices determines all measurable properties. We study hidden variable models
and find an averaging approximation that enables us to obtain a general
analytical result for the propagator. Analytic results showing the validity of
the approximation are obtained. We apply hidden variable models to
protein-protein interaction networks (PINs) in which the hidden variable is the
association free-energy, determined by distributions that depend on
biochemistry and evolution. We compute degree distributions as well as
clustering coefficients of several PINs of different species; good agreement
with measured data is obtained. For the human interactome two different
parameter sets give the same degree distributions, but the computed clustering
coefficients differ by a factor of about two. This shows that degree
distributions are not sufficient to determine the properties of PINs.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Community structure is an important property of complex networks. An
automatic discovery of such structure is a fundamental task in many
disciplines, including sociology, biology, engineering, and computer science.
Recently, several community discovery algorithms have been proposed based on
the optimization of a quantity called modularity (Q). However, the problem of
modularity optimization is NP-hard, and the existing approaches often suffer
from prohibitively long running time or poor quality. Furthermore, it has been
recently pointed out that algorithms based on optimizing Q will have a
resolution limit, i.e., communities below a certain scale may not be detected.
In this research, we first propose an efficient heuristic algorithm, Qcut,
which combines spectral graph partitioning and local search to optimize Q.
Using both synthetic and real networks, we show that Qcut can find higher
modularities and is more scalable than the existing algorithms. Furthermore,
using Qcut as an essential component, we propose a recursive algorithm, HQcut,
to solve the resolution limit problem. We show that HQcut can successfully
detect communities at a much finer scale and with a higher accuracy than the
existing algorithms. Finally, we apply Qcut and HQcut to study a
protein-protein interaction network, and show that the combination of the two
algorithms can reveal interesting biological results that may be otherwise
undetectable.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We derive an approach to define the causal direction of the wavevector of
modes in optical metamaterials, which in turn, determines signs of refractive
index and impedance as a function of {\it real and imaginary} parts of
dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability. We use the developed
technique to demonstrate that the interplay between resonant response of
constituents of metamaterials can be used to achieve efficient dispersion
management. Finally we demonstrate broadband dispersion-less index and
impedance matching in active nanowire-based negative index materials. Our work
opens new practical applications of negative index composites for broadband
lensing, imaging, and pulse-routing.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We sketch the derivation of a Newtonian gravity-like force emerging from a
direct-action variant of classical electromagnetism. The binding energy is a
consequence of maximal phase correlation of the sources mediated by
approximately monochromatic direct-action fields. The resulting force then has
the character of a strong version of the van der Waals force, whose superior
strength can be attributed to relatively coherent primary fields (compared with
the totally incoherent effects of the ZPF). The model also predicts the
existence of a background having some of the character of dark energy.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Two approaches for closing the turbulence subgrid-scale stress tensor in
terms of matrix exponentials are introduced and compared. The first approach is
based on a formal solution of the stress transport equation in which the
production terms can be integrated exactly in terms of matrix exponentials.
This formal solution of the subgrid-scale stress transport equation is shown to
be useful to explore special cases, such as the response to constant velocity
gradient, but neglecting pressure-strain correlations and diffusion effects.
The second approach is based on an Eulerian-Lagrangian change of variables,
combined with the assumption of isotropy for the conditionally averaged
Lagrangian velocity gradient tensor and with the `Recent Fluid Deformation'
(RFD) approximation. It is shown that both approaches lead to the same basic
closure in which the stress tensor is expressed as the product of the matrix
exponential of the resolved velocity gradient tensor multiplied by its
transpose. Short-time expansions of the matrix exponentials are shown to
provide an eddy-viscosity term and particular quadratic terms, and thus allow a
reinterpretation of traditional eddy-viscosity and nonlinear stress closures.
The basic feasibility of the matrix-exponential closure is illustrated by
implementing it successfully in Large Eddy Simulation of forced isotropic
turbulence. The matrix-exponential closure employs the drastic approximation of
entirely omitting the pressure-strain correlation and other `nonlinear
scrambling' terms. But unlike eddy-viscosity closures, the matrix exponential
approach provides a simple and local closure that can be derived directly from
the stress transport equation with the production term, and using physically
motivated assumptions about Lagrangian decorrelation and upstream isotropy.

Categories: nlin.CD, astro-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In this paper we investigate two-dimensional (2D) Rayleigh-B\'enard
convection using direct numerical simulation in Boussinesq fluids of Prandtl
number $P = 6.8$ confined between thermally conducting plates. We show through
the simulation that in a small range of reduced Rayleigh number $r$ ($770 < r <
890$) the 2D rolls move chaotically in a direction normal to the roll axis. The
lateral shift of the rolls may lead to global flow reversal of the convective
motion. The chaotic traveling rolls are observed in simulation with {\it
free-slip} as well as {\it no-slip} boundary conditions on the velocity field.
We show that the traveling rolls and the flow reversal are due to an interplay
between the real and imaginary parts of the critical modes.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We review the decomposition method of stock return cross-correlations,
presented previously for studying the dependence of the correlation coefficient
on the resolution of data (Epps effect). Through a toy model of random
walk/Brownian motion and memoryless renewal process (i.e. Poisson point
process) of observation times we show that in case of analytical treatability,
by decomposing the correlations we get the exact result for the frequency
dependence. We also demonstrate that our approach produces reasonable fitting
of the dependence of correlations on the data resolution in case of empirical
data. Our results indicate that the Epps phenomenon is a product of the finite
time decay of lagged correlations of high resolution data, which does not scale
with activity. The characteristic time is due to a human time scale, the time
needed to react to news.

Categories: cond-mat.supr-con, gr-qc, physics.ins-det
Abstract: Combining the principle of magnetic flux quantization inside a
superconducting loop and existence of rigid platforms (i.e., solids,
non-deformable under the action of gravitational waves) a design for
gravitational wave antenna is suggested. This design could yield a non-resonant
detector, with modest sizes and capability to generate detectable signals for
gravitational waves from astrophysical sources.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: Tracking individual nano-objets in live cells during arbitrary long times is
an ubiquitous need in modern biology. We present here a method for tracking
individual 5 nm gold nanoparticles on live cells. It relies on the photothermal
effect and the detection of the Laser Induced Scattering around a NanoAbsorber
(LISNA). The key point for recording trajectories at video rate is the use of a
triangulation procedure. The effectiveness of the method is tested against
Single fluorescent Molecule Tracking in live COS7 cells on subsecond time
scales. We further demonstrate recordings for several minutes of AMPA receptors
trajectories on the plasma membrane of live neurons. SNaPT has the unique
potential to record arbitrary long trajectory of membrane proteins using
non-fluorescent nanometer sized labels.

Categories: physics.optics, cond-mat.other
Abstract: The Photothermal Heterodyne Imaging method is used to study for the first
time the absorption spectra of individual gold nanoparticles with diameters
down to 5 nm. Intrinsic size effects wich result in a broadening of the Surface
Plasmon resonance are unambiguously observed. Dispersions in the peak energies
and homogeneous widths of the single particle resonances are revealed. The
experimental results are analysed within the frame of Mie theory.

Categories: physics.optics, cond-mat.other
Abstract: Photothermal heterodyne detection is used to record the first
room-temperature absorption spectra of single CdSe/ZnS semiconductor
nanocrystals. These spectra are recorded in the high cw excitation regime, and
the observed bands are assigned to transitions involving biexciton and trion
states. Comparison with the single nanocrystals photoluminescence spectra leads
to the measurement of spectral Stokes shifts free from ensemble averaging.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We performed a visualization of membrane proteins labeled with 10-nm gold
nanoparticles in cells, using an all-optical method based on photothermal
interference contrast. The high sensitivity of the method and the stability of
the signals allows 3D imaging of individual nanoparticles without the drawbacks
of photobleaching and blinking inherent to fluorescent markers. A simple
analytical model is derived to account for the measurements of the signal
amplitude and the spatial resolution. The photothermal interference contrast
method provides an efficient, reproducible, and promising way to visualize low
amounts of proteins in cells by optical means.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We demonstrate an integral gated mode single photon detector at telecom
wavelengths. The charge number of an avalanche pulse rather than the peak
current is monitored for single-photon detection. The transient spikes in
conventional gated mode operation are canceled completely by integrating, which
enables one to improve the performance of single photon detector greatly with
the same avalanche photodiode. This method has achieved a detection efficiency
of 29.9% at the dark count probability per gate equal to 5.57E-6/gate
(1.11E-6/ns) at 1550nm.

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.PS
Abstract: We report on the experimental observation of two-dimensional surface waves
localized at the edge or in the corner of femtosecond laser-written waveguide
arrays in fused silica. Increasing the power of the input beam allows one to
observe a clear transition from a linear diffraction pattern to localized
nonlinear surface states, which can exist at the interface only above a certain
power threshold.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We present experimental results on the relaxation dynamics of vesicles
subjected to a time-dependent elongation flow. We observed and characterized a
new instability, which results in the formation of higher order modes of the
vesicle shape (wrinkles), after a switch in the direction of the gradient of
the velocity. This surprising generation of membrane wrinkles can be explained
by the appearance of a negative surface tension during the vesicle deflation,
due to compression in a sign-switching transient. Moreover, the formation of
buds in the vesicle membrane has been observed in the vicinity of the dynamical
transition point.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: In this paper we review the applicability of autofluorescent proteins for
single-molecule imaging in biology. The photophysical characteristics of
several mutants of the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) and those of DsRed are
compared and critically discussed for their use in cellular biology. The
alternative use of two-photon excitation at the single-molecule level or
Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy is envisaged for the study of individual
autofluorescent proteins. Single-molecule experiments performed in live cells
using eGFP and preferably eYFP fusion proteins are reviewed. Finally, the first
use at the single-molecule level of citrine, a more photostable variant of the
eYFP is reported when fused to a receptor for neurotransmitter in live cells.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Trafficking of glutamate receptors into and out of synapses is critically
involved in the plasticity of excitatory synaptic transmission. Endocytosis and
exocytosis of receptors have initially been thought to account alone for this
trafficking. However, membrane proteins also traffic through surface lateral
diffusion in the plasma membrane. We describe developments in
electrophysiological and optical approaches that have allowed for the real time
measurement of glutamate receptor surface trafficking in live neurons. These
include (i) specific imaging of surface receptors using a pH sensitive
fluorescent protein, (ii) design of a photoactivable drug to inactivate locally
surface receptors and monitor electrophysiologically their recovery, and
(iii)application of single molecule fluorescence microscopy to directly track
the movement of individual surface receptors with nanometer resolution inside
and outside synapses. Altogether, these approaches have demonstrated that
glutamate receptors diffuse at high rates in the neuronal membrane and suggest
a key role for surface diffusion in the regulation of receptor numbers at
synapses.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: In the last decade evidence has accumulated that small domains of 50-700 nm
in diameter are located in the exoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane. Most
of these domains supposedly consist of specific sets of lipids and proteins,
and are believed to coordinate signal transduction cascades. Whether similar
domains are also present in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane is
unclear so far. To investigate the presence of cytoplasmic leaflet domains, the
H-Ras membrane-targeting sequence was fused to the C-terminus of the enhanced
yellow fluorescent protein. Using single-molecule fluorescence microscopy,
trajectories of individual molecules diffusing in the cytoplasmic leaflet of
the plasma membrane were recorded. From these trajectories, the diffusion of
individual membrane-anchored enhanced yellow fluorescent protein molecules was
studied in live cells on timescales from 5 to 200 ms. The results show that the
diffusion of 30-40% of the molecules is constrained in domains with a typical
size of 200 nm. Neither breakdown of actin nor cholesterol extraction changed
the domain characteristics significantly, indicating that the observed domains
may not be related to the membrane domains identified so far.

Categories: physics.optics, cond-mat.other
Abstract: We introduce a new, highly sensitive, and simple heterodyne optical method
for imaging individual nonfluorescent nanoclusters and nanocrystals. A 2 order
of magnitude improvement of the signal is achieved compared to previous
methods. This allows for the unprecedented detection of individual small
absorptive objects such as metallic clusters (of 67 atoms) or nonluminescent
semiconductor nanocrystals. The measured signals are in agreement with a
calculation based on the scattering field theory from a photothermal-induced
modulated index of refraction profile around the nanoparticle.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Trafficking of AMPA receptors in and out of synapses is crucial for synaptic
plasticity. Previous studies have focused on the role of endo/exocytosis
processes or that of lateral diffusion of extra-synaptic receptors. We have now
directly imaged AMPAR movements inside and outside synapses of live neurons
using single-molecule fluorescence microscopy. Inside individual synapses, we
found immobile and mobile receptors, which display restricted diffusion.
Extra-synaptic receptors display free diffusion. Receptors could also exchange
between these membrane compartments through lateral diffusion. Glutamate
application increased both receptor mobility inside synapses and the fraction
of mobile receptors present in a juxtasynaptic region. Block of inhibitory
transmission to favor excitatory synaptic activity induced a transient increase
in the fraction of mobile receptors and a decrease in the proportion of
juxtasynaptic receptors. Altogether, our data show that rapid exchange of
receptors between a synaptic and extra-synaptic localization occurs through
regulation of receptor diffusion inside synapses.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In this study, using the analytical and recurrence relations suggested by the
authors in previous works, the new efficient and reliable program procedure for
the overlap integrals over Slater type orbitals (STOs) is presented. The
proposed procedure guarantees a highly accurate evaluation of the overlap
integrals with arbitrary values of quantum numbers, screening constants and
internuclear distances. It is demonstrated that the computational accuracy of
the proposed procedure is not only dependent on the efficiency of formulas, as
has been discussed previously, but also on a number of other factors including
the used program language package and solvent properties. The numerical results
obtained using the algorithm described in the present work are in a complete
agreement with those obtained using the alternative evaluation procedure. We
notice that the program works without any restrictions and in all range of
integral parameters.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In the last few decades, some hypotheses for entropy production (EP)
principles have been forwarded as possible candidates for organizational
principles in non-linear non- equilibrium systems. Two important hypotheses
will be studied: the maximum entropy production (MaxEP) principle that claims
that the selected steady state has the highest EP, and the gradient response
principle that claims that the EP of the selected steady state (maximally)
increases when the external thermodynamic driving force increases. We will
formulate these hypotheses more rigorously and present a simple chemical
reaction model to test these hypotheses. With the help of this model, we will
clearly demonstrate that there are different MaxEP hypotheses being discussed
in the literature and we will look at some parts in the literature where these
differences are not always clarified. Furthermore, our chemical model will be a
general counter example to all of these MaxEP and gradient response hypotheses.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: Even-order dispersion cancellation, an effect previously identified with
frequency-entangled photons, is demonstrated experimentally for the first time
with a linear, classical interferometer. A combination of a broad bandwidth
laser and a high resolution spectrometer was used to measure the intensity
correlations between anti-correlated optical frequencies. Only 14% broadening
of the correlation signal is observed when significant material dispersion,
enough to broaden the regular interferogram by 4250%, is introduced into one
arm of the interferometer.

Categories: cond-mat.other, physics.optics
Abstract: Interaction between metal surface waves and periodic geometry of
subwavelength structures is at the core of the recent but crucial renewal of
interest in plasmonics. One of the most intriguing points is the observation of
abnormal strong transmission through these periodic structures, which can
exceed by orders of magnitude the classical transmission given by the filling
factor of the plate. The actual paradigm is that this abnormal transmission
arises from the periodicity, and then that such high transmission should
disappear in random geometries. Here, we show that extra energy can be coupled
through the subwavelength structure by adding a controlled quantity of noise to
the position of the apertures. This result can be modelled in the statistical
framework of stochastic resonance. The evolution of the coupled energy with
respect to noise gives access to the extra energy coupled at the surface of the
subwavelength array.

Categories: q-bio.BM, cond-mat.soft, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: The probability distributions for bending angles in double helical DNA
obtained in all-atom molecular dynamics simulations are compared with
theoretical predictions. The computed distributions remarkably agree with the
worm-like chain theory for double helices of one helical turn and longer, and
qualitatively differ from predictions of the semi-elastic chain model. The
computed data exhibit only small anomalies in the apparent flexibility of short
DNA and cannot account for the recently reported AFM data (Wiggins et al,
Nature nanotechnology 1, 137 (2006)). It is possible that the current atomistic
DNA models miss some essential mechanisms of DNA bending on intermediate length
scales. Analysis of bent DNA structures reveals, however, that the bending
motion is structurally heterogeneous and directionally anisotropic on the
intermediate length scales where the experimental anomalies were detected.
These effects are essential for interpretation of the experimental data and
they also can be responsible for the apparent discrepancy.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present here a detailed study of the behaviour of a three dimensional
Brownian motor based on cold atoms in a double optical lattice [P. Sjolund et
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 190602 (2006)]. This includes both experiments and
numerical simulations of a Brownian particle. The potentials used are spatially
and temporally symmetric, but combined spatiotemporal symmetry is broken by
phase shifts and asymmetric transfer rates between potentials. The diffusion of
atoms in the optical lattices is rectified and controlled both in direction and
speed along three dimensions. We explore a large range of experimental
parameters, where irradiances and detunings of the optical lattice lights are
varied within the dissipative regime. Induced drift velocities in the order of
one atomic recoil velocity have been achieved.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, q-bio.MN
Abstract: Schroedinger's book 'What is Life?' is widely credited for having played a
crucial role in development of molecular and cellular biology. My essay
revisits the issues raised by this book from the modern perspective of
epigenetics and systems biology. I contrast two classes of potential mechanisms
of epigenetic stability: 'epigenetic templating' and 'systems biology'
approaches, and consider them from the point of view expressed by Schroedinger.
I also discuss how quantum entanglement, a nonclassical feature of quantum
mechanics, can help to address the 'problem of small numbers' that lead
Schroedinger to promote the idea of molecular code-script for explanation of
stability of biological order.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, hep-ph, nucl-th
Abstract: Dick Dalitz produced lasting contributions to particle physics for 50 years.
Along with Dalitz pairs, Dalitz plots and CDD poles, he did major work in
parity violation, hyperon resonance identification, the quark model, and
hypernuclei. These topics will be summarized, with some emphasis on the
author's collaboration with Dalitz on quark spin and fragmentation
correlations, and, particularly, the work on the identification of the top
quark and its mass. Short biographical information is interspersed. This paper
is based on a presentation at the International School of Subnuclear Physics,
Erice 2006.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We present a formalism of x-ray dynamical diffraction from volume diffractive
optics with large numerical aperture and high aspect ratio, in an analogy to
the Takagi-Taupin equations for strained single crystals. We derive a set of
basic equations for dynamical diffraction from volume diffractive optics, which
enable us to study the focusing property of these optics with various grating
profiles. We study volume diffractive optics that satisfy the Bragg condition
to various degrees, namely flat, tilted and wedged geometries, and derive the
curved geometries required for ultimate focusing. We show that the curved
geometries satisfy the Bragg condition everywhere and phase requirement for
point focusing, and effectively focus hard x-rays to a scale close to the
wavelength.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: We investigate theoretically and experimentally the capillary-gravity waves
created by a small object moving steadily at the water-air interface along a
circular trajectory. It is well established that, for straight uniform motion,
no steady waves appear at velocities below the minimum phase velocity $c_{min}
= 23 \rm{cm \cdot s}^{-1}$. We show theoretically that no such velocity
threshold exists for a steady circular motion, for which, even at small
velocities, a finite wave drag is experienced by the object. This wave drag
originates from the emission of a spiral-like wave pattern. Our results are in
good agreement with direct experimental observations of the wave pattern
created by a circularly moving needle in contact with water. Our study leads to
new insights into the problem of animal locomotion at the water-air interface.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, cs.NI, math-ph, math.MP, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The combination of the compactness of networks, featuring small diameters,
and their complex architectures results in a variety of critical effects
dramatically different from those in cooperative systems on lattices. In the
last few years, researchers have made important steps toward understanding the
qualitatively new critical phenomena in complex networks. We review the
results, concepts, and methods of this rapidly developing field. Here we mostly
consider two closely related classes of these critical phenomena, namely
structural phase transitions in the network architectures and transitions in
cooperative models on networks as substrates. We also discuss systems where a
network and interacting agents on it influence each other. We overview a wide
range of critical phenomena in equilibrium and growing networks including the
birth of the giant connected component, percolation, k-core percolation,
phenomena near epidemic thresholds, condensation transitions, critical
phenomena in spin models placed on networks, synchronization, and
self-organized criticality effects in interacting systems on networks. We also
discuss strong finite size effects in these systems and highlight open problems
and perspectives.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, cond-mat.stat-mech, nlin.CD, physics.ao-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Low-order equal-time statistics of a barotropic flow on a rotating sphere are
investigated. The flow is driven by linear relaxation toward an unstable zonal
jet. For relatively short relaxation times, the flow is dominated by
critical-layer waves. For sufficiently long relaxation times, the flow is
turbulent. Statistics obtained from a second-order cumulant expansion are
compared to those accumulated in direct numerical simulations, revealing the
strengths and limitations of the expansion for different relaxation times.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: By analyzing the relationships between a socioeconomical system modeled
through evolutionary game theory and a physical system modeled through quantum
mechanics we show how although both systems are described through two theories
apparently different both are analogous and thus exactly equivalents. The
extensions of quantum mechanics to statistical physics and information theory
let us use some of their definitions for the best understanding of the behavior
of economics and biology. The quantum analogue of the replicator dynamics is
the von Neumann equation. A system in where all its members are in Nash
equilibrium is equivalent to a system in a maximum entropy state. Nature is a
game in where its players compete for a common welfare and the equilibrium of
the system that they are members. They act as a whole besides individuals like
they obey a rule in where they prefer to work for the welfare of the collective
besides the individual welfare.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an
Abstract: The stock market has been known to form homogeneous stock groups with a
higher correlation among different stocks according to common economic factors
that influence individual stocks. We investigate the role of common economic
factors in the market in the formation of stock networks, using the arbitrage
pricing model reflecting essential properties of common economic factors. We
find that the degree of consistency between real and model stock networks
increases as additional common economic factors are incorporated into our
model. Furthermore, we find that individual stocks with a large number of links
to other stocks in a network are more highly correlated with common economic
factors than those with a small number of links. This suggests that common
economic factors in the stock market can be understood in terms of
deterministic factors.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Advanced electromagnetic potentials are indigenous to the classical Maxwell
theory. Generally however they are deemed undesirable and are forcibly
excluded, destroying the theory's inherent time-symmetry. We investigate the
reason for this, pointing out that it is not necessary and in some cases is
counter-productive. We then focus on the direct-action theory in which the
advanced and retarded contributions are present symmetrically, with no
opportunity to supplement the particular integral solution of the wave equation
with an arbitrary complementary function. One then requires a plausible
explanation for the observed broken symmetry that, commonly, is understood
cannot be met by the Wheeler-Feynman mechanism because the necessary boundary
condition cannot be satisfied in acceptable cosmologies. We take this
opportunity to argue that the boundary condition is already met by all
expanding cosmologies simply as a result of cosmological red-shift. A
consequence is that the cosmological and thermodynamic arrows of time can be
equated, the direct action version of EM is preferred, and that advanced
potentials are ubiquitous.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The angular distribution of the emitted electrons, following the two-photon
ionization of the hydrogen-like ions, is studied within the framework of second
order perturbation theory and the Dirac equation. Using a density matrix
approach, we have investigated the effects which arise from the polarization of
the incoming light as well as from the higher multipoles in the expansion of
the electron--photon interaction. For medium- and high-Z ions, in particular,
the non-dipole contributions give rise to a significant change in the angular
distribution of the emitted electrons, if compared with the electric-dipole
approximation. This includes a strong forward emission while, in dipole
approxmation, the electron emission always occurs symmetric with respect to the
plane which is perpendicular to the photon beam. Detailed computations for the
dependence of the photoelectron angular distributions on the polarization of
the incident light are carried out for the ionization of H, Xe$^{53+}$, and
U$^{91+}$ (hydrogen-like) ions.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The existence of magnetosonic solitons in dusty plasmas is investigated. The
nonlinear magnetohydrodynamic equations for a warm dusty magnetoplasma are thus
derived. A solution of the nonlinear equations is presented. It is shown that,
due to the presence of dust, static structures are allowed. This is in sharp
contrast to the formation of the so called shocklets in usual magnetoplasmas. A
comparatively small number of dust particles can thus drastically alter the
behavior of the nonlinear structures in magnetized plasmas.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: Very recently, it has been shown that thermal noise and its artificial
versions (Johnson-like noises) can be utilized as an information carrier with
peculiar properties therefore it may be proper to call this topic Thermal Noise
Informatics. Zero Power (Stealth) Communication, Thermal Noise Driven
Computing, and Totally Secure Classical Communication are relevant examples. In
this paper, while we will briefly describe the first and the second subjects,
we shall focus on the third subject, the secure classical communication via
wire. This way of secure telecommunication utilizes the properties of
Johnson(-like) noise and those of a simple Kirchhoff's loop. The communicator
is unconditionally secure at the conceptual (circuit theoretical) level and
this property is (so far) unique in communication systems based on classical
physics. The communicator is superior to quantum alternatives in all known
aspects, except the need of using a wire. In the idealized system, the
eavesdropper can extract zero bit of information without getting uncovered. The
scheme is naturally protected against the man-in-the-middle attack. The
communication can take place also via currently used power lines or phone
(wire) lines and it is not only a point-to-point communication like quantum
channels but network-ready. Tests have been carried out on a model-line with
ranges beyond the ranges of any known direct quantum communication channel and
they indicate unrivalled signal fidelity and security performance. This simple
device has single-wire secure key generation/sharing rates of 0.1, 1, 10, and
100 bit/second for copper wires with diameters/ranges of 21 mm / 2000 km, 7 mm
/ 200 km, 2.3 mm / 20 km, and 0.7 mm / 2 km, respectively and it performs with
0.02% raw-bit error rate (99.98 % fidelity).

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: We present a short survey on fluctuation-enhanced gas sensing. We compare
some of its main characteristics with those of classical sensing. We address
the problem of linear response, information channel capacity, missed alarms and
false alarms.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We report quantitative relations between corruption level and economic
factors, such as country wealth and foreign investment per capita, which are
characterized by a power law spanning multiple scales of wealth and investments
per capita. These relations hold for diverse countries, and also remain stable
over different time periods. We also observe a negative correlation between
level of corruption and long-term economic growth. We find similar results for
two independent indices of corruption, suggesting that the relation between
corruption and wealth does not depend on the specific measure of corruption.
The functional relations we report have implications when assessing the
relative level of corruption for two countries with comparable wealth, and for
quantifying the impact of corruption on economic growth and foreign
investments.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The radiation hardness of silicon charged particle sensors is compared with
single crystal and polycrystalline diamond sensors, both experimentally and
theoretically. It is shown that for Si- and C-sensors, the NIEL hypothesis,
which states that the signal loss is proportional to the Non-Ionizing Energy
Loss, is a good approximation to the present data. At incident proton and
neutron energies well above 0.1 GeV the radiation damage is dominated by the
inelastic cross section, while at non-relativistic energies the elastic cross
section prevails. The smaller inelastic nucleon-Carbon cross section and the
light nuclear fragments imply that at high energies diamond is an order of
magnitude more radiation hard than silicon, while at energies below 0.1 GeV the
difference becomes significantly smaller.

Categories: cond-mat.other, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Characteristic versus critical features of earthquakes are studied on the
basis of the Olami-Feder-Christensen model. It is found that the local
recurrence-time distribution exhibits a sharp $\delta$-function-like peak
corresponding to rhythmic recurrence of events with a fixed ``period'' uniquely
determined by the transmission parameter of the model, together with a
power-law-like tail corresponding to scale-free recurrence of events. The model
exhibits phenomena closely resembling the asperity known in seismology.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is shown that the the interference of above-threshold electron de Broglie
waves, generated by an intense laser pulse at a metal surface yields attosecond
electron pulses. This inerference is an analogon of the superposition of high
harmonics generated from rare gas atoms, resulting in trains of attosecond
light pulses.Owing to the inherent kinematic dispersion, the propagation of
attosecond de Broglie waves in vacuum is very different from that of attosecond
light pulses, which propagate without changing shape. Above the metal surface
there are "collaps bands" and "revival layers" of the electron current even at
macroscopic distances. In the range of parameters considered, the maximum value
of the current densities of such ultrashort electron pulses has been estimated
to be of order of couple of tenths of milliamps per square centimeters.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The existing field theories are based on the properties of closed exterior
forms, which correspond to conservation laws for physical fields.
  In the present paper it is shown that closed exterior forms corresponding to
field theories are obtained from the equations modelling conservation (balance)
laws for material sistems (material media).
  The process of obtaining closed exterior forms demonstrates the connection
between field-theory equations and the equations for material sistems and
points to the fact that the foundations of field theories must be conditioned
by the properties of equations conservation laws for material sistems.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We identify plain evaporation of ions as the fundamental loss mechanism out
of a multipole ion trap. Using thermalized negative Cl- ions we find that the
evaporative loss rate is proportional to a Boltzmann factor. This thermodynamic
description sheds new light on the dynamics of particles in time-varying
confining potentials. It specifically allows us to extract the effective depth
of the ion trap as the activation energy for evaporation. As a function of the
rf amplitude we find two distinct regimes related to the stability of motion of
the trapped ions. For low amplitudes the entire trap allows for stable motion
and the trap depth increases with the rf field. For larger rf amplitudes,
however, rapid energy transfer from the field to the ion motion can occur at
large trap radii, which leads to a reduction of the effective trapping volume.
In this regime the trap depth decreases again with increasing rf amplitude. We
give an analytical parameterization of the trap depth for various multipole
traps that allows predictions of the most favorable trapping conditions.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: Pulse shape discrimination (PSD) is one of the most distinctive features of
liquid scintillators. Since the introduction of the scintillation techniques in
the field of particle detection, many studies have been carried out to
characterize intrinsic properties of the most common liquid scintillator
mixtures in this respect. Several application methods and algorithms able to
achieve optimum discrimination performances have been developed. However, the
vast majority of these studies have been performed on samples of small
dimensions. The Counting Test Facility, prototype of the solar neutrino
experiment Borexino, as a 4 ton spherical scintillation detector immersed in
1000 tons of shielding water, represents a unique opportunity to extend the
small-sample PSD studies to a large-volume setup. Specifically, in this work we
consider two different liquid scintillation mixtures employed in CTF,
illustrating for both the PSD characterization results obtained either with the
processing of the scintillation waveform through the optimum Gatti's method, or
via a more conventional approach based on the charge content of the
scintillation tail. The outcomes of this study, while interesting per se, are
also of paramount importance in view of the expected Borexino detector
performances, where PSD will be an essential tool in the framework of the
background rejection strategy needed to achieve the required sensitivity to the
solar neutrino signals.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: It is proved that the definition of simultaneity by Einstein leads to the
paradox motion of he string from the viewpoint of the observer in the inertial
system S' moving with velocity v with regard to the inertial system S.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: We study the propagation of nucleons and nuclei in tissue-like media within a
Monte Carlo Model for Heavy-ion Therapy (MCHIT) based on the GEANT4 toolkit
(version 8.2). The model takes into account fragmentation of projectile nuclei
and secondary interactions of produced nuclear fragments. Model predictions are
validated with available experimental data obtained for water and PMMA phantoms
irradiated by monoenergetic carbon-ion beams. The MCHIT model describes well
(1) the depth-dose distributions in water and PMMA, (2) the doses measured for
fragments of certain charge, (3) the distributions of positron emitting nuclear
fragments produced by carbon-ion beams, and (4) the energy spectra of secondary
neutrons measured at different angles to the beam direction. Radial dose
profiles for primary nuclei and for different projectile fragments are
calculated and discussed as possible input for evaluation of biological dose
distributions. It is shown that at the periphery of the transverse dose profile
close to the Bragg peak the dose from secondary nuclear fragments is comparable
to the dose from primary nuclei.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Surface roughness becomes relevant if typical length scales of the system are
comparable to the scale of the variations as it is the case in microfluidic
setups. Here, an apparent boundary slip is often detected which can have its
origin in the assumption of perfectly smooth boundaries. We investigate the
problem by means of lattice Boltzmann (LB) simulations and introduce an
``effective no-slip plane'' at an intermediate position between peaks and
valleys of the surface. Our simulations show good agreement with analytical
results for sinusoidal boundaries, but can be extended to arbitrary geometries
and experimentally obtained surface data. We find that the detected apparent
slip is independent of the detailed boundary shape, but only given by the
distribution of surface heights. Further, we show that the slip diverges as the
amplitude of the roughness increases.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.acc-ph
Abstract: Coherent Harmonic Generation (CHG), and in particular Nonlinear Harmonic
Generation (NHG), is of importance for both short wavelength Free-Electron
Lasers (FELs), in relation with the achievement of shorter wavelengths with a
fixed electron-beam energy, and high-average power FEL resonators, in relation
with destructive effects of higher harmonics radiation on mirrors. In this
paper we present a treatment of NHG from helical wigglers with particular
emphasis on the second harmonic. Our study is based on an exact analytical
solution of Maxwell's equations, derived with the help of a Green's function
method. In particular, we demonstrate that nonlinear harmonic generation (NHG)
from helical wigglers vanishes on axis. Our conclusion is in open contrast with
results in literature, that include a kinematical mistake in the description of
the electron motion.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: A very compact architecture has been developed for the first level Muon
Trigger of the LHCb experiment that processes 40 millions of proton-proton
collisions per second. For each collision, it receives 3.2 kBytes of data and
it finds straight tracks within a 1.2 microseconds latency. The trigger
implementation is massively parallel, pipelined and fully synchronous with the
LHC clock. It relies on 248 high density Field Programable Gate arrays and on
the massive use of multigigabit serial link transceivers embedded inside FPGAs.

Categories: physics.class-ph, nlin.CD, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We study resonances of multidimensional chaotic map dynamics. We use the
calculus of variations to determine the additive forcing function that induces
the largest response, that is, the greatest deviation from the unperturbed
dynamics. We include the additional constraint that only select degrees of
freedom be forced, corresponding to a very general class of problems in which
not all of the degrees of freedom in an experimental system are accessible to
forcing. We find that certain Lagrange multipliers take on a fundamental
physical role as the efficiency of the forcing function and the effective
forcing experienced by the degrees of freedom which are not forced directly.
Furthermore, we find that the product of the displacement of nearby
trajectories and the effective total forcing function is a conserved quantity.
We demonstrate the efficacy of this methodology with several examples.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: We report the first experimental demonstration of compensation of beam-beam
interaction effects in high-energy particle collider by using space-charge
forces of a low-energy electron beam. In our experiments, an electron lens, a
novel instrument developed for the beam-beam compensation, was set on a 980-GeV
proton bunch in the Tevatron proton-antiproton collider. The proton bunch
losses due to its interaction with antiproton beam were reduced by a factor of
2 when the electron lens was operating. We describe the principle of electron
lens operation and present experimental results.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, cond-mat.other, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We present here a review of the fundamental topics of Hartree-Fock theory in
Quantum Chemistry. From the molecular Hamiltonian, using and discussing the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation, we arrive to the Hartree and Hartree-Fock
equations for the electronic problem. Special emphasis is placed in the most
relevant mathematical aspects of the theoretical derivation of the final
equations, as well as in the results regarding the existence and uniqueness of
their solutions. All Hartree-Fock versions with different spin restrictions are
systematically extracted from the general case, thus providing a unifying
framework. Then, the discretization of the one-electron orbitals space is
reviewed and the Roothaan-Hall formalism introduced. This leads to a exposition
of the basic underlying concepts related to the construction and selection of
Gaussian basis sets, focusing in algorithmic efficiency issues. Finally, we
close the review with a section in which the most relevant modern developments
(specially those related to the design of linear-scaling methods) are commented
and linked to the issues discussed. The whole work is intentionally
introductory and rather self-contained, so that it may be useful for non
experts that aim to use quantum chemical methods in interdisciplinary
applications. Moreover, much material that is found scattered in the literature
has been put together here to facilitate comprehension and to serve as a handy
reference.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: Using the results found previously for the cooling rates of the emittances,
due to collisions between the electrons and the ions, a result is found for the
friction force acting on the ions. It is shown that the friction force found
here when used to track the ion bunch will give the same emittance cooling
rates as those found using the intrabeam scattering theory for electron cooling
>.For the case of the uniform in space electron bunch distribution, the
friction force found here agrees with the friction force result found with the
usual theory of electron cooling.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.data-an
Abstract: To improve the quality of life in a modern society it is essential to reduce
the distance between basic research and applications, whose crucial roles in
shaping today's society prompt us to seek their understanding. Existing studies
on this subject, however, have neglected the network character of the
interaction between university and industry. Here we use state-of-the-art
network theory methods to analyze this interplay in the so-called Framework
Programme--an initiative which sets out the priorities for the European Union's
research and technological development. In particular we study in the 5th
Framework Programme (FP5) the role played by companies and scientific
institutions and how they contribute to enhance the relationship between
research and industry. Our approach provides quantitative evidence that while
firms are size hierarchically organized, universities and research
organizations keep the network from falling into pieces, paving the way for an
effective knowledge transfer.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We discuss a novel kind of nonlinear coupler with one channel filled with a
negative index material (NIM). The opposite directionality of the phase
velocity and the energy flow in the NIM channel facilitates an effective
feedback mechanism that leads to optical bistability and gap soliton formation.

Categories: cond-mat.mes-hall, physics.atom-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: In a recent Letter (Phys. Rev. Lett. \textbf{98}, 083601 (2007),
arXiv:cond-mat/0610804), O. Assaf and E. Akkermans claim that the angular
correlations of the light intensity scattered by a cloud of cold atoms with
internal degeneracy (Zeeman sublevels) of the ground state overcome the usual
Rayleigh law. More precisely, they found that they become exponentially large
with the size of the sample. In what follows, we will explain why their results
are wrong and, in contrary, why the internal degeneracy leads to lower
intensity correlations.

Categories: quant-ph, hep-th, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: The present work is a brief review of the progressive search of improper
delta-functions which are of interest in Quantum Mechanics and in the problem
of motion in General Relativity Theory.

Categories: physics.pop-ph
Abstract: The ballistic coefficient of a bullet describes how it slows in flight due to
air resistance. This article presents experimental determinations of ballistic
coefficients showing that the majority of bullets tested have their previously
published ballistic coefficients exaggerated from 5-25% by the bullet
manufacturers. These exaggerated ballistic coefficients lead to inaccurate
predictions of long range bullet drop, retained energy and wind drift.

Categories: physics.pop-ph
Abstract: This paper presents a method for using a PC soundcard, microphone and a
chronograph to determine bullet BC with an accuracy of 6%. This is useful when
a second chronograph is unavailable or when the projectile accuracy is
insufficient to use a far chronograph.

Categories: physics.class-ph, hep-th
Abstract: We investigate the electromagnetic field generated by a point charge moving
along a helical trajectory inside a circular waveguide with conducting walls
filled by homogeneous dielectric. The parts corresponding to the radiation
field are separated and the formulae for the radiation intensity are derived
for both TE and TM waves. It is shown that the main part of the radiated quanta
is emitted in the form of the TE waves. Various limiting cases are considered.
The results of the numerical calculations show that the insertion of the
waveguide provides an additional mechanism for tuning the characteristics of
the emitted radiation by choosing the parameters of the waveguide and filling
medium.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In this paper, we investigate a new waveform for UWB systems obtained by the
combination of Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex (OFDM) and Code Division
Multiple Access (CDMA). The proposed system, called Spread Spectrum -
Multi-Carrier - Multiple Access (SS-MC-MA) turns out to be a judicious solution
to combat frequency selectivity and narrowband interferers, and to manage the
coexistence of several users and piconets. It is shown that the addition of a
degree of freedom brought by the spreading component of SS-MC-MA allows to
optimize jointly the assignment of the number of used codes and coding rates in
order to make the system more robust. Through simulations, it is demonstrated
that the new system can outperform Multi-Band OFDM Alliance (MBOA) for low data
rates and is able to provide wider range of rates.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: For Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN) systems, resource allocation
between several users within a piconet and the coexistence of several piconets
are very important points to take into consideration for the optimization of
high data rate Ultra Wide Band (UWB) systems. To improve the performance of the
Multi-Band OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex) solution proposed by
the Multi-Band OFDM Alliance (MBOA), the addition of a spreading component in
the frequency domain is a good solution since it makes resource allocation
easier and also offers better robustness against channel frequency selectivity
and narrowband interference. The Spread Spectrum - Multi-Carrier - Multiple
Access (SS-MC-MA) system proposed in this article offers not only the
advantages of Multi-Carrier - Coded Division Multiple Access (MC-CDMA) brought
by frequency spreading, but also a more effective dynamic resource allocation
in a multi-user and multi-piconet context. These improvements are obtained
without increasing the complexity of the radio-frequency part compared to the
classical MBOA solution.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: In this Letter, we proposed a mixing navigation mechanism, which interpolates
between random-walk and shortest-path protocol. The navigation efficiency can
be remarkably enhanced via a few routers. Some advanced strategies are also
designed: For non-geographical scale-free networks, the targeted strategy with
a tiny fraction of routers can guarantee an efficient navigation with low and
stable delivery time almost independent of network size. For geographical
localized networks, the clustering strategy can simultaneously increase the
efficiency and reduce the communication cost. The present mixing navigation
mechanism is of significance especially for information organization of
wireless sensor networks and distributed autonomous robotic systems.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We consider the problem of the flattening of the velocity curves in galactic
discs and the consequent postulation of dark matter from three different but
converging perspectives-- a change in the large scale dimensionality of space,
a variation of $G$ and the MOND approach. We also discuss the paradigm of the
universe itself being a Black Hole.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: We find actual evidence, relying upon vorticity time series taken in a high
Reynolds number atmospheric experiment, that to a very good approximation the
surface boundary layer flow may be described, in a statistical sense and under
certain regimes, as an advected ensemble of homogeneous turbulent systems,
characterized by a lognormal distribution of fluctuating intensities. Our
analysis suggests that usual direct numerical simulations of homogeneous and
isotropic turbulence, performed at moderate Reynolds numbers, may play an
important role in the study of turbulent boundary layer flows, if supplemented
with appropriate statistical information concerned with the structure of large
scale fluctuations.

Categories: hep-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: An easy-to-implement form of the Metropolis Algorithm is described which,
unlike most standard techniques, is well suited to sampling from multi-modal
distributions on spaces with moderate numbers of dimensions (order ten) in
environments typical of investigations into current constraints on
Beyond-the-Standard-Model physics. The sampling technique makes use of
pre-existing information (which can safely be of low or uncertain quality)
relating to the distribution from which it is desired to sample. This
information should come in the form of a ``bank'' or ``cache'' of space points
of which at least some may be expected to be near regions of interest in the
desired distribution. In practical circumstances such ``banks of clues'' are
easy to assemble from earlier work, aborted runs, discarded burn-in samples
from failed sampling attempts, or from prior scouting investigations. The
technique equilibrates between disconnected parts of the distribution without
user input. The algorithm is not lead astray by ``bad'' clues, but there is no
free lunch: performance gains will only be seen where clues are helpful.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: In this series of three papers we present results from a combined
experimental and theoretical effort to quantitatively describe capacitively
coupled radio-frequency discharges in oxygen. The particle-in-cell Monte-Carlo
model on which the theoretical description is based will be described in the
present paper. It treats space charge fields and transport processes on an
equal footing with the most important plasma-chemical reactions. For given
external voltage and pressure, the model determines the electric potential
within the discharge and the distribution functions for electrons, negatively
charged atomic oxygen, and positively charged molecular oxygen. Previously used
scattering and reaction cross section data are critically assessed and in some
cases modified. To validate our model, we compare the densities in the bulk of
the discharge with experimental data and find good agreement, indicating that
essential aspects of an oxygen discharge are captured.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We present an one-dimensional particle-in-cell Monte-Carlo model for
capacitively coupled radio-frequency discharges in oxygen. The model
quantitatively describes the central part of the discharge. For a given voltage
and pressure, it self-consistently determines the electric potential and the
distribution functions for electrons, negatively charged atomic oxygen, and
positively charged molecular oxygen. Previously used collision cross sections
are critically assessed and in some cases modified. Provided associative
detachment due to metastable oxygen molecules is included in the model, the
electro-negativities in the center of the discharge are in excellent agreement
with experiments. Due to lack of empirical data for the cross section of this
process, we propose a simple model and discuss its limitations.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The feasibility of chalcogenide rib waveguides working at lambda = 10.6
microns has been demonstrated. The waveguides comprised a several microns thick
Te2As3Se5 film deposited by thermal evaporation on a polished As2S3 glass
substrate and further etched by physical etching in Ar or CF4/O2 atmosphere.
Output images at 10.6 microns and some propagation losses roughly estimated at
10dB/cm proved that the obtained structures behaved as channel waveguides with
a good lateral confinement of the light. The work opens the doors to the
realisation of components able to work in the mid and thermal infrared up to 20
microns and even more.

Categories: physics.ins-det, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Soil bulk density affects water storage, water and nutrient movement, and
plant root activity in the soil profile. Its measurement is difficult in field
conditions. Vibration-induced conductivity fluctuation was investigated to
quantify soil bulk density with possible field applications in the future. The
AC electrical conductivity of soil was measured using a pair of blade-like
electrodes while exposing the soil to periodic vibration. The blades were
positioned longitudinally and transversally to the direction of the induced
vibration to enable the calculation of a normalized index. The normalized index
was expected to provide data independent from the vibration strength and to
reduce the effect of soil salinity and water content. The experiment was
conducted on natural and salinized fine sand at two moisture conditions and
four bulk densities. The blade-shaped electrodes improved electrode-soil
contact compared to cylindrical electrodes, and thereby, reduced measurement
noise. Simulations on a simplified resistor lattice indicate that the
transversal effect increases as soil bulk density decreases. Measurement of dry
sand showed a negative correlation between the normalized conductivity
fluctuation and soil bulk density for both longitudinal and transversal
settings. The decrease in the transversal signal was smaller than expected. The
wet natural and salinized soils performed very similarly as hypothesized, but
their normalized VICOF response was not significant to bulk density changes.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Although power laws of the Zipf type have been used by many workers to fit
rank distributions in different fields like in economy, geophysics, genetics,
soft-matter, networks etc., these fits usually fail at the tails. Some
distributions have been proposed to solve the problem, but unfortunately they
do not fit at the same time both ending tails. We show that many different data
in rank laws, like in granular materials, codons, author impact in scientific
journal, etc. are very well fitted by a beta-like function. Then we propose
that such universality is due to the fact that a system made from many
subsystems or choices, imply stretched exponential frequency-rank functions
which qualitatively and quantitatively can be fitted with the proposed
beta-like function distribution in the limit of many random variables. We prove
this by transforming the problem into an algebraic one: finding the rank of
successive products of a given set of numbers.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, hep-th, math-ph, math.MP, quant-ph
Abstract: We examine resonances for two systems consisting of a particle coupled to a
massless boson's field. The field is the free field in the whole space. In the
first system, the particle is confined inside a ball. We show that besides the
usual energy levels of the particle, which have become complex through the
coupling to the field, other resonances are to be taken into account if the
ball's radius is comparable to the particle's Compton wavelength. In the second
system, the particle is in a finite-depth square-well potential. We study the
way the resonances' width depends on the extent of the uncoupled particle's
wave functions. In both cases, we limit ourselves to considering two levels of
the particle only.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Lochons (local charged bosons or local electron pairs) can form on D+ to give
D- (bosonic ions) in Palladium Deuteride in the solid state. Such entities will
occur at special sites or in linear channel owing to strong electron-phonon
interaction or due to potential inversion on metallic electrodes. These lochons
can catalyze D- - D+ fusion as a consequence of internal conversion leading to
the formation of He-4 plus production of energy (Q=23.8 MeV) which is carried
by the alpha particle and the ejected electron-pair. The reaction rate for this
fusion process is calculated.

Categories: math.NA, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The Navier-Stokes equations and magnetohydrodynamics equations are written in
terms of poloidal and toroidal potentials in a finite cylinder. This
formulation insures that the velocity and magnetic fields are divergence-free
by construction, but leads to systems of partial differential equations of
higher order, whose boundary conditions are coupled. The influence matrix
technique is used to transform these systems into decoupled parabolic and
elliptic problems. The magnetic field in the induction equation is matched to
that in an exterior vacuum by means of the Dirichlet-to-Neumann mapping, thus
eliminating the need to discretize the exterior. The influence matrix is scaled
in order to attain an acceptable condition number.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A rule to assign a physical meaning to Lagrange multipliers is discussed.
Examples from mechanics, statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics are given.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: Determination of air density and the quantitative estimates of water vapour
adsorbed or desorbed by the surface of mass standard, remain the principals
sources of uncertainties when weighing mass standard made from stainless steel
or super alloy. The classical method, for air density determination, use the so
called CIPM-1981/91 formula and the measured air parameters. An other approach
is based only on the results of comparisons, realized successively in air and
in vacuum, between special artefacts. The distribution and the state of water
molecules inside the chamber of mass comparator influence the results of
weighing. Also, the instruments used for air moisture measurement are either,
not very sensitive (capacitive hygrometer) or disturbing for environment
(dew-point hygrometer). To control that, a proposal method is given and
observations of water vapour behaviour inside the enclosure for different
conditions are reported. Keywords. mass metrology, air density, water vapour

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The paper presents 3D numerical results for the laminar liquid metal flow in
a rectangular duct compared with experimental results. It is shown that the
magnetic interaction parameter $N$ is the main parameter governing the flow
provided turbulent pulsations are locally suppressed by magnetic field.

Categories: math.NA, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A spectral method is described for solving coupled elliptic problems on an
interior and an exterior domain. The method is formulated and tested on the
two-dimensional interior Poisson and exterior Laplace problems, whose solutions
and their normal derivatives are required to be continuous across the
interface. A complete basis of homogeneous solutions for the interior and
exterior regions, corresponding to all possible Dirichlet boundary values at
the interface, are calculated in a preprocessing step. This basis is used to
construct the influence matrix which serves to transform the coupled boundary
conditions into conditions on the interior problem. Chebyshev approximations
are used to represent both the interior solutions and the boundary values. A
standard Chebyshev spectral method is used to calculate the interior solutions.
The exterior harmonic solutions are calculated as the convolution of the
free-space Green's function with a surface density; this surface density is
itself the solution to an integral equation which has an analytic solution when
the boundary values are given as a Chebyshev expansion. Properties of Chebyshev
approximations insure that the basis of exterior harmonic functions represents
the external near-boundary solutions uniformly. The method is tested by
calculating the electrostatic potential resulting from charge distributions in
a rectangle. The resulting influence matrix is well-conditioned and solutions
converge exponentially as the resolution is increased. The generalization of
this approach to three-dimensional problems is discussed, in particular the
magnetohydrodynamic equations in a finite cylindrical domain surrounded by a
vacuum.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We use all-order relativistic many-body perturbation theory to study 5s^2 nl
configurations of In I and Sn II. Energies, E1-amplitudes, and hyperfine
constants are calculated using all-order method, which accounts for single and
double excitations of the Dirac-Fock wave functions.

Categories: physics.med-ph, physics.ins-det
Abstract: Magnetic resonance imaging at ultra-low fields (ULF MRI) is a promising new
imaging method that uses SQUID sensors to measure the spatially encoded
precession of pre-polarized nuclear spin populations at a microtesla-range
measurement field. In this work, a seven-channel SQUID system designed for
simultaneous 3D ULF MRI and magnetoencephalography (MEG) is described. The
system includes seven second-order SQUID gradiometers, characterized by
magnetic field resolutions of 1.2 - 2.8 fT/rtHz. It is also equipped with five
sets of coils for 3D Fourier imaging with pre-polarization. Essential technical
details of the design are discussed. The system's ULF MRI performance is
demonstrated by multi-channel 3D images of a preserved sheep brain acquired at
46 microtesla measurement field with pre-polarization at 40 mT. The imaging
resolution is 2.5 mm x 2.5 mm x 5 mm. The ULF MRI images are compared to images
of the same brain acquired using conventional high-field MRI. Different ways to
improve imaging SNR are discussed.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: In order to build a new concept of photomultiplier based on silicon
technology, design and characterization of 5x5 arrays of a new generation of
single photon avalanche diodes (SPAD) manufactured by ST-Microelectronics have
been performed. Single photons sensitivity, dark noise and timing resolution of
the SPAD- STM devices in several experimental conditions have been evaluated.
Moreover, the effects arising from the multiple integration of many elements
and the study of their common read-out have been deeply investigated.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The work reported below is a first of its kind study of the properties of
turbulent flow without strong mean shear in a Newtonian fluid in proximity of
the turbulent/non-turbulent interface, with emphasis on the small scale
aspects. The main tools used are a three-dimensional particle tracking system
(3D-PTV) allowing to measure and follow in a Lagrangian manner the field of
velocity derivatives and direct numerical simulations (DNS). The comparison of
flow properties in the turbulent (A), intermediate (B) and non-turbulent (C)
regions in the proximity of the interface allows for direct observation of the
key physical processes underlying the entrainment phenomenon. The differences
between small scale strain and enstrophy are striking and point to the definite
scenario of turbulent entrainment via the viscous forces originating in strain.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Angular momentum changing collisions can be suppressed in atoms whose valence
electrons are submerged beneath filled shells of higher principle quantum
number. To determine whether spin-exchange collisions are suppressed in these
"submerged shell" atoms, we measured spin-exchange collisions of six hyperfine
states of Mn at temperatures below 1 K. Although the 3d valence electrons in Mn
are submerged beneath a filled 4s orbital, we find that the spin exchange rate
coefficients are similar to those of Na and H (which are non-submerged shell
atoms).

Categories: physics.chem-ph, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, cond-mat.other, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We construct improved quantum Monte Carlo estimators for the spherically- and
system-averaged electron pair density (i.e. the probability density of finding
two electrons separated by a relative distance u), also known as the
spherically-averaged electron position intracule density I(u), using the
general zero-variance zero-bias principle for observables, introduced by
Assaraf and Caffarel. The calculation of I(u) is made vastly more efficient by
replacing the average of the local delta-function operator by the average of a
smooth non-local operator that has several orders of magnitude smaller
variance. These new estimators also reduce the systematic error (or bias) of
the intracule density due to the approximate trial wave function. Used in
combination with the optimization of an increasing number of parameters in
trial Jastrow-Slater wave functions, they allow one to obtain well converged
correlated intracule densities for atoms and molecules. These ideas can be
applied to calculating any pair-correlation function in classical or quantum
Monte Carlo calculations.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The differential equation for Boltzmann's function is replaced by the
corresponding discrete finite difference equation. The difference equation is,
then, symmetrized so that the equation remains invariant when step d is
replaced by -d. The solutions of this equation come in Boson-Fermion pairs.
Reciprocal symmetric Boltzmann's function, thus, unifies both Bosonic and
Fermionic distributions.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We introduce an approach to implement full coherent control on nanometer
length scales. It is based on spatio-temporal modulation of the surface plasmon
polariton (SPP) fields at the thick edge of a nanowedge. The SPP wavepackets
propagating toward the sharp edge of this nanowedge are compressed and
adiabatically concentrated at a nanofocus, forming an ultrashort pulse of local
fields. The one-dimensional spatial profile and temporal waveform of this pulse
are completely coherently controlled.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, nlin.AO
Abstract: A new symplectic variational approach is developed for modeling dissipation
in kinetic equations. This approach yields a double bracket structure in phase
space which generates kinetic equations representing coadjoint motion under
canonical transformations. The Vlasov example admits measure-valued
single-particle solutions. Such solutions are reversible; and the total entropy
is a Casimir, and thus is preserved.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We study physical situation considered by Einstein (Ann. Physik, 17, 1905)
for his first derivation of mass-energy equivalence. Einstein introduced a
constant $C$ in his derivation and reasoning surrounding $C$ and equations
containing $C$ caused criticism by Ives. Here we clarify Einstein's derivation
and obtain a value for constant $C$. The obtained zero value for $C$ suggests
alternative explanation for Einstein's derivation and makes Ives's criticism a
void and for which details are also presented in this paper.

Categories: math.NA, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The Navier-Stokes equations in a finite cylinder are written in terms of
poloidal and toroidal potentials in order to impose incompressibility.
Regularity of the solutions is ensured in several ways: First, the potentials
are represented using a spectral basis which is analytic at the cylindrical
axis. Second, the non-physical discontinuous boundary conditions at the
cylindrical corners are smoothed using a polynomial approximation to a steep
exponential profile. Third, the nonlinear term is evaluated in such a way as to
eliminate singularities. The resulting pseudo-spectral code is tested using
exact polynomial solutions and the spectral convergence of the coefficients is
demonstrated. Our solutions are shown to agree with exact polynomial solutions
and with previous axisymmetric calculations of vortex breakdown and of
nonaxisymmetric calculations of onset of helical spirals. Parallelization by
azimuthal wavenumber is shown to be highly effective.

Categories: physics.class-ph, physics.ins-det
Abstract: Since S-parameter measurements without uncertainty cannot claim any
credibility, the uncertainties in full two-port Vector Network Analyser (VNA)
measurements were estimated using total complex differentials (Total
Differential Errors). To express precisely a comparison relation between
complex differential errors, their differential error regions (DERs) were used.
To demonstrate the method in the most accurate case of a direct zero-length
thru, practical results are presented for commonly used Z-parameters of a
simple, two-port, DC resistive T-network, which was built and tested against
frequency with a VNA measurement system extended by two lengthy transmission
lines.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, astro-ph
Abstract: Two-photon decay rates in simple atoms such as hydrogenlike systems represent
rather interesting fundamental problems in atomic physics. The sum of the
energies of the two emitted photons has to fulfill an energy conservation
condition, the decay takes place via intermediate virtual states, and the total
decay rate is obtained after an integration over the energy of one of the
emitted photons. Here, we investigate cases with a virtual state having an
energy intermediate between the initial and the final state of the decay
process, and we show that due to non-uniform convergence, only a careful
treatment of the singularities infinitesimally displaced from the photon
integration contour leads to consistent and convergent results.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report on recent progress in the treatment of two-loop binding corrections
to the Lamb shift, with a special emphasis on S and P states. We use these and
other results in order to infer an updated theoretical value of the Lamb shift
in 4He+.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We have constructed an approximate microscopic model for the neutron dynamic
structure factor of solid methane in phase II. We expect our model to apply for
neutron energies below 1\textit{eV} at pressures near 1 bar and temperatures
below 20K, where solid methane exists in a phase, called phase II, in which the
tetrahedral hydrogens exist in a mixed phase of free rotors and hindered
rotors. Certain matrix elements needed for the dynamic structure factor $S(Q,
\omega)$ are adapted from a calculation by Ozaki \textit{et
al.}\cite{ozaki:3442}\cite{ozaki2}. The model treats the effects of molecular
translations, intramolecular vibrations and the free and hindered rotational
degrees of freedom as uncoupled ones. Total scattering cross sections
calculated from the model agree with the cross section measurements of
Grieger\cite{grieger:3161} and Whittemore\cite{Wittemore} for the incident
neutron energies of 0.5 \textit{meV} $\sim$ 1\textit{eV}. The effective density
of states extracted from the model was compared with the Harker $&$ Brugger
frequency spectrum extracted from neutron scattering measurements conducted at
22K\cite{HARKER1967}.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Integrated light in direct excitation and energy transfer luminescence has
been investigated. In the investigations reported here, monomolecular centers
were taken into account. It was found that the integrated light is equal to the
product of generation rate and time of duration of excitation pulse for both
direct excitation and energy transfer luminescence.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The refractive index of a dielectric medium comprising both passive and
inverted components in its permittivity was determined using two methods: (i)
in the time domain, a finite-difference algorithm to compute the
frequency-domain reflectance from reflection data for a pulsed plane wave that
is normally incident on a dielectric half-space, and (ii) in the frequency
domain, the deflection of an obliquely incident Gaussian beam on transmission
through a dielectric slab. The dielectric medium was found to be an active
medium with a negative real part for its refractive index. Thereby, a recent
controversy in the scientific literature was resolved.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The lifetime of the asymmetric fundamental stretching 2218 cm$^{-1}$
vibration of the anesthetic gas nitrous oxide (N$_2$O) dissolved in octanol and
olive oil is reported. These solvents are model systems commonly used to assess
anesthetic potency. Picosecond time-scale molecular dynamics simulations have
suggested that protein dynamics or membrane dynamics play a role in the
molecular mechanism of anesthetic action. Ultrafast infrared spectroscopy with
100 fs time resolution is an ideal tool to probe dynamics of anesthetic
molecules on such timescales. Pump-probe studies at the peak of the vibrational
band yield a lifetime of $55 \pm 1$ ps in olive oil and $52 \pm 1 ps$ in
octanol. The similarity of lifetimes suggests that energy relaxation of the
anesthetic is determined primarily by the hydrophobic nature of the
environment, consistent with models of anesthetic action. The results show that
nitrous oxide is a good model system for probing anesthetic-solvent
interactions using nonlinear infrared spectroscopy.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The Bell-Evans-Polanyi principle that is valid for a chemical reaction that
proceeds along the reaction coordinate over the transition state is extended to
molecular dynamics trajectories that in general do not cross the dividing
surface between the initial and the final local minima at the exact transition
state. Our molecular dynamics Bell-Evans-Polanyi principle states that low
energy molecular dynamics trajectories are more likely to lead into the basin
of attraction of a low energy local minimum than high energy trajectories. In
the context of global optimization schemes based on molecular dynamics our
molecular dynamics Bell-Evans-Polanyi principle implies that using low energy
trajectories one needs to visit a smaller number of distinguishable local
minima before finding the global minimum than when using high energy
trajectories.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Sensitivity to temporal variation of the fundamental constants may be
strongly enhanced in transitions between narrow close levels of different
nature. This enhancement may be realized in a large number of molecules due to
cancelation between the ground state fine structure omega_f and vibrational
interval omega_v (omega=omega_f - n omega_v is close to zero, delta
omega/omega= K (2 delta alpha/alpha +0.5 delta mu/mu), K >>1, mu=m_p/m_e).
  The intervals between the levels are conveniently located in microwave
frequency range and the level widths are very small. Required accuracy of the
shift measurements is about 0.01-1 Hz. As examples, we consider molecules
Cl_2+, CuS, IrC, SiBr and HfF+.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We presented a detailed experimental study on lasing in GaAs microstadium
with various shapes. Unlike most deformed microcavities, the lasing threshold
varies non-monotonically with the major-to-minor-axis ratio of the stadium.
Under spatially uniform optical pumping, the first lasing mode corresponds to a
high-quality scar mode consisting of several unstable periodic orbits. By
tuning the shape of GaAs stadium, we are able to minimize the lasing threshold.
This work demonstrates the possibility of controlling chaotic microcavity
laser.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We investigate the lasing modes in fully chaotic polymer microstadiums under
optical pumping. The lasing modes are regularly spaced in frequency, and their
amplitudes oscillate with frequency. Our numerical simulations reveal that the
lasing modes are multi-orbit scar modes. The interference of partial waves
propagating along the constituent orbits results in local maxima of quality
factor at certain frequencies. The observed modulation of lasing mode amplitude
with frequency results from the variation of quality factor, which provides the
direct evidence of wave interference effect in open chaotic microcavities.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Since the advent of chirped pulse amplification1 the peak power of lasers has
grown dramatically and opened the new branch of high field science, delivering
the focused irradiance, electric fields of which drive electrons into the
relativistic regime. In a plasma wake wave generated by such a laser,
modulations of the electron density naturally and robustly take the shape of
paraboloidal dense shells, separated by evacuated regions, moving almost at the
speed of light. When we inject another counter-propagating laser pulse, it is
partially reflected from the shells, acting as relativistic flying
(semi-transparent) mirrors, producing an extremely time-compressed
frequency-multiplied pulse which may be focused tightly to the diffraction
limit. This is as if the counterstreaming laser pulse bounces off a
relativistically swung tennis racket, turning the ball of the laser photons
into another ball of coherent X-ray photons but with a form extremely
relativistically compressed to attosecond and zeptosecond levels. Here we
report the first demonstration of the frequency multiplication detected from
the reflection of a weak laser pulse in the region of the wake wave generated
by the driver pulse in helium plasma. This leads to the possibility of very
strong pulse compression and extreme coherent light intensification. This
Relativistic Tennis with photon beams is demonstrated leading to the
possibility toward reaching enormous electromagnetic field intensification and
finally approaching the Schwinger field, toward which the vacuum nonlinearly
warps and eventually breaks, producing electron-positron pairs.

Categories: physics.space-ph
Abstract: This paper shows how the exposure of the Moon to the Earth's plasmasheet is
subject to decadal variations due to lunar precession. The latter is a key
property of the Moon's apparent orbit around the Earth - the nodes of that
orbit precess around the ecliptic, completing one revolution every 18.6 years.
This precession is responsible for a number of astronomical phenomena, e.g. the
year to year drift of solar and lunar eclipse periods. It also controls the
ecliptic latitude at which the Moon crosses the magnetotail and thus the number
and duration of lunar encounters with the plasmasheet. This paper presents a
detailed model of those encounters and applies it to the period 1960 to 2030.
This shows that the total lunar exposure to the plasmasheet will vary from 10
hours per month at a minimum of the eighteen-year cycle rising to 40 hours per
month at the maximum. These variations could have a profound impact on the
accumulation of charge due plasmasheet electrons impacting the lunar surface.
Thus we should expect the level of lunar surface charging to vary over the
eighteen-year cycle. The literature contains reports that support this: several
observations made during the cycle maximum of 1994-2000 are attributed to
bombardment and charging of the lunar surface by plasmasheet electrons. Thus we
conclude that lunar surface charging will vary markedly over an eighteen-year
cycle driven by lunar precession. It is important to interpret lunar
environment measurements in the context of this cycle and to allow for the
cycle when designing equipment for deployment on the lunar surface. This is
particularly important in respect of developing plans for robotic exploration
on the lunar surface during the next cycle maximum of 2012-19.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: No abstract given. Contents:
  I. Definition and Introduction
  II. Schelling Model
  III. Opinion Dynamics
  IV. Languages, Hierarchies and Football
  V. Future Directions

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: At the quantization of fields, due to the non-linear character of the time
reversal, the creation-annihilation operators for the negative frequency modes
should be replaced to the operators of antiparticles not directly in the field
operators, but in the operator products. For the standard minimal Lagrangians
(asymmetrical under the complex conjugated fields) it is shown that the charge
conjugation (C-) symmetry conditions for the Hamiltonian and the charge
operator lead to the identities for the operator products allowing one to
replace the negative frequency operator products to the positive frequency
ones. At the same time the operators in observables become normal ordered and
the zero-point energy does not appear. Only the symmetrized under the field
operators Lagrangians lead to the zero-point energy. The confrontation by the
experiments of the such C-symmetric quantization of fields and the solution
some of the vacuum energy problems are discussed.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We explore the possible role of elastic mismatch between epidermis and
mesophyll as a driving force for the development of leaf venation. The current
prevalent 'canalization' hypothesis for the formation of veins claims that the
transport of the hormone auxin out of the leaves triggers cell differentiation
to form veins. Although there is evidence that auxin plays a fundamental role
in vein formation, the simple canalization mechanism may not be enough to
explain some features observed in the vascular system of leaves, in particular,
the abundance of vein loops. We present a model based on the existence of
mechanical instabilities that leads very naturally to hierarchical patterns
with a large number of closed loops. When applied to the structure of high
order veins, the numerical results show the same qualitative features as actual
venation patterns and, furthermore, have the same statistical properties. We
argue that the agreement between actual and simulated patterns provides strong
evidence for the role of mechanical effects on venation development.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: Water vapour inside the mass comparator enclosure is a critical parameter. In
fact, fluctuations of this parameter during mass weighing can lead to errors in
the determination of an unknown mass. To control that, a proposal method is
given and tested. Preliminary results of our observation of water vapour
sorption and desorption processes from walls and mass standard are reported.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Starting with two light clocks to derive time dilation expression, as many
textbooks do, and then adding a third one, we work on relativistic spacetime
coordinates relations for some simple events as emission, reflection and return
of light pulses. Besides time dilation, we get, in the following order, Doppler
k-factor, addition of velocities, length contraction, Lorentz Transformations
and spacetime interval invariance. We also use Minkowski spacetime diagram to
show how to interpret some few events in terms of spacetime coordinates in
three different inertial frames.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: We elaborate a theory for the modeling of concepts using the mathematical
structure of quantum mechanics. Concepts are represented by vectors in the
complex Hilbert space of quantum mechanics and membership weights of items are
modeled by quantum weights calculated following the quantum rules. We apply
this theory to model the disjunction of concepts and show that experimental
data of membership weights of items with respect to the disjunction of concepts
can be modeled accurately. It is the quantum effects of interference and
superposition, combined with an effect of context, that are at the origin of
the effects of overextension and underextension observed as deviations from a
classical use of the disjunction. We put forward a graphical explanation of the
effects of overextension and underextension by interpreting the quantum model
applied to the modeling of the disjunction of concepts.

Categories: gr-qc, cond-mat.str-el, hep-ph, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: Investigation of the many-body condensed-matter systems allows us to connect
the microscopic physics at the atomic energy scale and the macroscopic physics
emerging in the low-energy corner. It gives some hints on the mechanisms of the
formation of the physical laws which our Universe obeys. The paper is devoted
to the centenary of Matvei Petrovich Bronstein.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: Detection of a separator line that connects magnetic nulls and the
determination of the dynamics and plasma environment of such a structure can
improve our understanding of the three-dimensional (3D) magnetic reconnection
process. However, this type of field and particle configuration has not been
directly observed in space plasmas. Here we report the identification of a pair
of nulls, the null-null line that connects them, and associated fans and spines
in the magnetotail of Earth using data from the four Cluster spacecraft. With
di and de designating the ion and electron inertial lengths, respectively, the
separation between the nulls is found to be ~0.7di and an associated
oscillation is identified as a lower hybrid wave with wavelength ~ de. This in
situ evidence of the full 3D reconnection geometry and associated dynamics
provides an important step toward to establishing an observational framework of
3D reconnection.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, astro-ph, gr-qc
Abstract: It has long been known that once you cross the event horizon of a black hole,
your destiny lies at the central singularity, irrespective of what you do.
Furthermore, your demise will occur in a finite amount of proper time. In this
paper, the use of rockets in extending the amount of time before the collision
with the central singularity is examined. In general, the use of such rockets
can increase your remaining time, but only up to a maximum value; this is at
odds with the ``more you struggle, the less time you have'' statement that is
sometimes discussed in relation to black holes. The derived equations are
simple to solve numerically and the framework can be employed as a teaching
tool for general relativity.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.soc-ph, q-fin.ST
Abstract: Employing profits data of Japanese firms in 2003--2005, we kinematically
exhibit the static log-normal distribution in the middle scale region. In the
derivation, a Non-Gibrat's law under the detailed balance is adopted together
with following two approximations. Firstly, the probability density function of
profits growth rate is described as a tent-shaped exponential function.
Secondly, the value of the origin of the growth rate distribution divided into
bins is constant. The derivation is confirmed in the database consistently.
  This static procedure is applied to a quasi-static system. We dynamically
describe a quasi-static log-normal distribution in the middle scale region. In
the derivation, a Non-Gibrat's law under the detailed quasi-balance is adopted
together with two approximations confirmed in the static system. The resultant
distribution is power-law with varying Pareto index in the large scale region
and the quasi-static log-normal distribution in the middle scale region. In the
distribution, not only the change of Pareto index but also the change of the
variance of the log-normal distribution depends on the parameter of the
detailed quasi-balance. As a result, Pareto index and the variance of the
log-normal distribution are related to each other.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A simple stochastic formulation of the multiple scattering representation
solution of the classical linear incoherent trapping problem is presented for a
broad audience. A clear connection with the alternative Holstein's solution
ansatz is emphasized by the (re)interpretation of the fundamental mode as the
one associated with a relaxed nonchanging spatial distribution of excitation.
Expressions for overall relaxation parameters (ensemble emission yield and
lifetime) as well as time-resolved (decay and spatial distribution) and
steady-state quantities (spectra and spatial distribution) are given with the
fundamental mode contribution singled out. The multiple scattering
representation is advocated for final undergraduate and beginning graduate
physics instruction based on physical insight and computation feasibility. This
will be illustrated in the following instalment of this contribution.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The two-body interaction in dilute solutions of polymer chains in good
solvents can be modeled by means of effective bounded potentials, the simplest
of which being that of penetrable spheres (PSs). In this paper we construct two
simple analytical theories for the structural properties of PS fluids: a
low-temperature (LT) approximation, that can be seen as an extension to PSs of
the well-known solution of the Percus-Yevick (PY) equation for hard spheres,
and a high-temperature (HT) approximation based on the exact asymptotic
behavior in the limit of infinite temperature. Monte Carlo simulations for a
wide range of temperatures and densities are performed to assess the validity
of both theories. It is found that, despite their simplicity, the HT and LT
approximations exhibit a fair agreement with the simulation data within their
respective domains of applicability, so that they complement each other. A
comparison with numerical solutions of the PY and the hypernetted-chain
approximations is also carried out, the latter showing a very good performance,
except inside the core at low temperatures.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Cell colonies of bacteria, tumour cells and fungi, under nutrient limited
growth conditions, exhibit complex branched growth patterns. In order to
investigate this phenomenon we present a simple hybrid cellular automaton model
of cell colony growth. In the model the growth of the colony is limited by a
nutrient that is consumed by the cells and which inhibits cell division if it
falls below a certain threshold. Using this model we have investigated how the
nutrient consumption rate of the cells affects the growth dynamics of the
colony. We found that for low consumption rates the colony takes on a Eden-like
morphology, while for higher consumption rates the morphology of the colony is
branched with a fractal geometry. These findings are in agreement with previous
results, but the simplicity of the model presented here allows for a linear
stability analysis of the system. By observing that the local growth of the
colony is proportional to the flux of the nutrient we derive an approximate
dispersion relation for the growth of the colony interface. This dispersion
relation shows that the stability of the growth depends on how far the nutrient
penetrates into the colony. For low nutrient consumption rates the penetration
distance is large, which stabilises the growth, while for high consumption
rates the penetration distance is small, which leads to unstable branched
growth. When the penetration distance vanishes the dispersion relation is
reduced to the one describing Laplacian growth without ultra-violet
regularisation. The dispersion relation was verified by measuring how the
average branch width depends on the consumption rate of the cells and shows
good agreement between theory and simulations.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, nlin.AO
Abstract: Actual organizations, in particular the ones which operate in evolving and
distributed environments, need advanced frameworks for the management of the
knowledge life cycle. These systems have to be based on the social relations
which constitute the pattern of collaboration ties of the organization. We
demonstrate here, with the aid of a model taken from the theory of graphs, that
it is possible to provide the conditions for an effective knowledge management.
A right way could be to involve the actors with the highest betweeness
centrality in the generation of discussion groups. This solution allows the
externalization of tacit knowledge, the preservation of knowledge and the raise
of innovation processes.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Path integral Monte Carlo approach is used to study the coupled quantum
dynamics of the electron and nuclei in hydrogen molecule ion. The coupling
effects are demonstrated by comparing differences in adiabatic
Born--Oppenheimer and non-adiabatic simulations, and inspecting projections of
the full three-body dynamics onto adiabatic Born--Oppenheimer approximation.
  Coupling of electron and nuclear quantum dynamics is clearly seen. Nuclear
pair correlation function is found to broaden by 0.040 a_0 and average bond
length is larger by 0.056 a_0. Also, non-adiabatic correction to the binding
energy is found. Electronic distribution is affected less, and therefore, we
could say that the adiabatic approximation is better for the electron than for
the nuclei.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We study the effects of different forms of information feedback associated
with mass media on an agent-agent based model of the dynamics of cultural
dissemination. In addition to some processes previously considered, we also
examine a model of local mass media influence in cultural dynamics. Two
mechanisms of information feedback are investigated: (i) direct mass media
influence, where local or global mass media act as an additional element in the
network of interactions of each agent, and (ii) indirect mass media influence,
where global media acts as a filter of the influence of the existing network of
interactions of each agent. Our results generalize previous findings showing
that cultural diversity builds-up by increasing the strength of the mass media
influence. We find that this occurs independently of the mechanisms of action
(direct or indirect) of the mass media message. However, through an analysis of
the full range of parameters measuring cultural diversity, we establish that
the enhancement of cultural diversity produced by interaction with mass media
only occurs for strong enough mass media messages. In comparison with previous
studies a main different result is that weak mass media messages, in
combination with agent-agent interaction, are efficient in producing cultural
homogeneity. Moreover, the homogenizing effect of weak mass media messages are
more efficient for direct local mass media messages than for global mass media
messages or indirect global mass media influences.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: The power spectral density (PSD) function is commonly used to specify
seismometer performance. It is derived from the FFT of acceleration and
correction is made for the transfer function of the instrument that generated
the data. As with any such spectrum of density (`per Hz') type, the noise
inherent to a PSD is large. This article illustrates the value of a function
that is derived from the PSD and for which the influence of noise is
significantly reduced. Called the cumulative spectral power (CSP), it is
obtained from the PSD through the noise-reducing process of integration. The
maximum of the CSP (corresponding to the longest graphed value of the period)
provides a means for estimating the total vibrational power of the earth. The
present author has significantly simplified the process of PSD generation. Thus
routine graphing is straightforwared-of first the FFT, followed by the
generation of both a PSD and its associated CSP. The unique properties of the
CSP make it valuable for the study of a variety of earth dynamics. For example,
the strking simplicity of a CSP graph generated from a record containing a
strong teleseismic earthquake is undoubtedly important to the development and
refinement of any viable theory of earthquake dynamics.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The monotonicity and stability of difference schemes for, in general,
hyperbolic systems of conservation laws with source terms are studied. The
basic approach is to investigate the stability and monotonicity of a non-linear
scheme in terms of its corresponding scheme in variations. Such an approach
leads to application of the stability theory for linear equation systems to
establish stability of the corresponding non-linear scheme. The main
methodological innovation is the theorems establishing the notion that a
non-linear scheme is stable (and monotone) if the corresponding scheme in
variations is stable (and, respectively, monotone). Criteria are developed for
monotonicity and stability of difference schemes associated with the numerical
analysis of systems of partial differential equations. The theorem of
Friedrichs (1954) is generalized to be applicable to variational schemes with
non-symmetric matrices. A new modification of the central Lax-Friedrichs (LxF)
scheme is developed to be of the second order accuracy. A monotone piecewise
cubic interpolation is used in the central schemes to give an accurate
approximation for the model in question. The stability and monotonicity of the
modified scheme are investigated. Some versions of the modified scheme are
tested on several conservation laws, and the scheme is found to be accurate and
robust. As applied to hyperbolic conservation laws with, in general, stiff
source terms, it is constructed a second order scheme based on
operator-splitting techniques.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The new emerging quantum physics - quantum computing conceptual bridge,
mandates a ``grand unification'' of space-time-matter and quantum information
(all quantized), with deep implications for science in general. The major
physics revolutions in our understanding of the universe are briefly reviewed
and a ``missing'' equivalence principle is identified and its nature explained.
An implementation as an external super-symmetry $\C{E}=ic\C{P}$ is suggested,
generalizing the Wick rotation ``trick''. Taking advantage of the
interpretation of entropy as a measure of symmetry, it is naturally asimilated
within the present Feynman Path Integral algebraic formalism.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We apply the mathematical technique of factorization of differential
operators to two different problems. First we review our results related to the
supersymmetry of the Montroll kinks moving onto the microtubule walls as well
as mentioning the sine-Gordon model for the microtubule nonlinear excitations.
Second, we find analytic expressions for a class of one-parameter solutions of
a sort of diffusion equation of Bessel type that is obtained by supersymmetry
from the homogeneous form of a simple damped wave equations derived in the
works of P.A. Robinson and collaborators for the corticothalamic system. We
also present a possible interpretation of the diffusion equation in the brain
context

Categories: quant-ph, math.SG, physics.optics
Abstract: We investigate the action of local unitary operations on multimode (pure or
mixed) Gaussian states and single out the minimal number of locally invariant
parametres which completely characterise the covariance matrix of such states.
For pure Gaussian states, central resources for continuous-variable quantum
information, we investigate separately the parametre reduction due to the
additional constraint of global purity, and the one following by the
local-unitary freedom. Counting arguments and insights from the phase-space
Schmidt decomposition and in general from the framework of symplectic analysis,
accompany our description of the standard form of pure n-mode Gaussian states.
In particular we clarify why only in pure states with n<=3 modes all the direct
correlations between position and momentum operators can be set to zero by
local unitary operations. For any n, the emerging minimal set of parametres
contains complete information about all forms of entanglement in the
corresponding states. An efficient state engineering scheme (able to encode
direct correlations between position and momentum operators as well) is
proposed to produce entangled multimode Gaussian resources, its number of
optical elements matching the minimal number of locally invariant degrees of
freedom of general pure n-mode Gaussian states. We demonstrate that so-called
"block-diagonal" Gaussian states, without direct correlations between position
and momentum, are systematically less entangled, on average, than arbitrary
pure Gaussian states.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: This study is concerned with the diffusion of a passive scalar $\Theta(\r,t)$
advected by general $n$-dimensional shear flows $\u=u(y,z,...,t)\hat{x}$ having
finite mean-square velocity gradients. The unidirectionality of the
incompressible flows conserves the stream-wise scalar gradient,
$\partial_x\Theta$, allowing only the cross-stream components to be amplified
by shearing effects. This amplification is relatively weak because an important
contributing factor, $\partial_x\Theta$, is conserved, effectively rendering a
slow diffusion process. It is found that the decay of the scalar variance
$<\Theta^2>$ satisfies $d<\Theta^2>/dt\ge -C\kappa^{1/3}$, where $C>0$ is a
constant, depending on the fluid velocity gradients and initial distribution of
$\Theta$, and $\kappa$ is the molecular diffusivity. This result generalizes to
axisymmetric flows on the plane and on the sphere having finite mean-square
angular velocity gradients.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: The recent debate on hypercomputation has arisen new questions both on the
computational abilities of quantum systems and the Church-Turing Thesis role in
Physics. We propose here the idea of "effective physical process" as the
essentially physical notion of computation. By using the Bohm and Hiley active
information concept we analyze the differences between the standard form
(quantum gates) and the non-standard one (adiabatic and morphogenetic) of
Quantum Computing, and we point out how its Super-Turing potentialities derive
from an incomputable information source in accordance with Bell's constraints.
On condition that we give up the formal concept of "universality", the
possibility to realize quantum oracles is reachable. In this way computation is
led back to the logic of physical world.

Categories: physics.hist-ph
Abstract: This paper, third in the series on Indian tradition of physics, describes
conceptions of the cosmos with ideas that are clearly spelt out in texts such
as Yoga Vasishtha.In particular, the conception of multiple universes that
occurs often in this text will be examined in the framework of the Indian
physics. The other surprising concepts that are discussed include flow of time
and its variability with respect to different observers, and the possibility of
passage across universes.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Temperature and velocity oscillations have been found in a rectangular
Rayleigh-B\'{e}nard convection cell, in which one large scale convection roll
exists. At $Ra=8.9 \times 10^{11}$ and $Pr=4$, temperature oscillation can be
observed in most part of the system and the oscillation period remains almost
constant, $t_T = 74 \pm 2$ seconds. Velocity oscillation can only be found in
its horizontal component, $v_y$ (perpendicular to large scale circulation
plane), near the cell sidewall, its oscillation period is also constant, $t_T =
65 \pm 2$ seconds, at these positions. Temperature and velocity oscillations
have different Ra dependence, which are respectively indicated by Peclect
number $Pe_T = 0.55Ra^{0.47}$ and $Pe_v = 0.28Ra^{0.50}$ . In comparison to the
case of cylindrical cell, we find that the velocity oscillation is affected by
the system geometry.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: A bent crystal shield which is capable of deflecting cosmic radiation ions of
all atomic numbers away from spacecraft using the ion channeling effect is
described. Its effect on the transmitted angular distribution of heavy,
high-energy ions is characterized using Monte Carlo channeling simulations.
Ions up to an energy limit set by the bent crystal curvature radius are
deflected by the full curvature angle. A bent crystal shield with a 1 x 1 cm2
surface area capable of deflecting such ions with energies up to 100
GeV/nucleon is fabricated in which the lattice planes across the entrance
surface are uniformly aligned.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We show numerically that vector antenna arrays can generate radio beams which
exhibit spin and orbital angular momentum characteristics similar to those of
helical Laguerre-Gauss laser beams in paraxial optics. For low frequencies (< 1
GHz), digital techniques can be used to coherently measure the instantaneous,
local field vectors and to manipulate them in software. This opens up for new
types of experiments that go beyond those currently possible to perform in
optics, for information-rich radio physics applications such as radio
astronomy, and for novel wireless communication concepts.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The ground state of an externally confined one-component Yukawa plasma is
derived analytically using the local density approximation (LDA). In
particular, the radial density profile is computed. The results are compared
with the recently obtained mean-field (MF) density profile
\cite{henning.pre06}. While the MF results are more accurate for weak
screening, LDA with correlations included yields the proper description for
large screening. By comparison with first-principle simulations for
three-dimensional spherical Yukawa crystals we demonstrate that both
approximations complement each other. Together they accurately describe the
density profile in the full range of screening parameters.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: Recently, several powerful tools for the reconstruction of stochastic
differential equations from measured data sets have been proposed [e.g. Siegert
et al., Physics Letters A 243, 275 (1998); Hurn et al., Journal of Time Series
Analysis 24, 45 (2003)]. Efficient application of the methods, however,
generally requires Markov properties to be fulfilled. This constraint typically
seems to be violated on small scales, which frequently is attributed to
physical effects. On the other hand, measurement noise such as uncorrelated
measurement and discretization errors has large impacts on the statistics of
measurements on small scales. We demonstrate, that the presence of measurement
noise, likewise, spoils Markov properties of an underlying Markov processes.
This fact is promising for the further development of techniques for the
reconstruction of stochastic processes from measured data, since limitations at
small scales might stem from artificial noise sources rather than from
intrinsic properties of the dynamics of the underlying process. Measurement
noise, however, can be controlled much better than the intrinsic dynamics of
the underlying process.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: Presently clearing electrodes are being considered as a possible cure of
e-cloud driven problems in existing and future colliders. 'Invisible'
electrodes, made of a thin highly resistive layer pasted on a dielectric plate,
have been proposed as one of design solutions for the e-cloud clearing. For the
first time such electrodes were successfully used in the electron-positron
accumulator (EPA) of LEP. Similar electrodes had been using for a long time for
ion clearing purposes in the DAFNE electron ring. Theoretical considerations
and experimental measurements at DAFNE have revealed a substantial contribution
of the ion clearing electrodes (ICE) to the machine broad-band impedance giving
rise to several harmful effects degrading the collider performance. In this
paper we discuss the impact of the electrodes on DAFNE beam dynamics, show the
results of ICE wake field and impedance calculations and compare them with
available experimental data. We also describe the procedure of ICE removal from
the wiggler sections of the electron ring that has resulted in remarkable
improvements in terms of beam dynamics and geometric luminosity.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, q-bio.OT, quant-ph
Abstract: Invited contribution to "Quantum Aspects of Life", D. Abbott Ed. (World
Scientific, Singapore, 2007).

Categories: physics.ed-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A computational model study for complete frequency redistribution linear
incoherent two-level atomic radiation trapping in optically dense media using
the multiple scattering representation is presented. This model study discuss
at length the influence of the spectral distributions, overall opacity and
emission quantum yield to trapping distorted ensemble quantities stressing
physical insight and with a non-specialist audience in mind. Macroscopic
reemission yield, lifetime, steady state spectra and spatial distributions are
calculated as a function of intrinsic emission yield, opacity and external
excitation mode for Doppler, Lorentz and Voigt lineshapes. The work could
constitute the basis for a final undergraduate or beginning graduate project in
computational physics instruction and implements the analytical developments of
the previous instalment of this contribution.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper we first construct a mathematical model for the Universe
expansion that started up with the original Big Bang. Next, we discuss the
problematic of the mechanical and physical laws invariance regarding the
spatial frame exchanges. We then prove the (theoretical) existence of a
variable metric $g_t$, depending on time and satisfying to a simplified
Einstein equation, so that all free ordinary trajectories are geodesics. This
is done by considering the classical Galileo-Newtonian space and time relation,
by using generalized Newtonian principles and adding the approved physical new
ones (as covariance principle, Mach principle, the Einstein equivalence
principle ...) in order to establish a new cosmological model of the dynamical
Universe as being $(U(t))_{t\geq 0}=(B_e(O,t),g_t)_{t\geq 0}$, where $B_e(O,t)$
is the Euclidean ball of radius $t$ in $\mathbb R^3$. The cosmological metric
$g_t$ is totally determined, at time $t$, by the mass energy distribution
$E_t(X)$ on $B_e(O,t)$. We study also the black holes phenomenon and we prove
that the total and global cosmological energy distribution $E_t(X)$ satisfies
to the wave equation whose solutions are characterized by pseudo-frequencies
depending on time and related to the spectrum of the Dirichlet problem on the
unit ball $B_e(O,1)$ for the Laplace-Beltrami operator -$\Delta$. Our model is
consistent in the sense that all Newtonian and classical physical laws are
valid as particular cases in classical situations. Then, we show that all basic
results of Modern Physics are still valid without using the second postulate of
special relativity nor the uncertainty principle.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present a method of transferring a cold atom between spatially separated
microtraps by means of a Raman transition between the ground motional states of
the two traps. The intermediate states for the Raman transition are the
vibrational levels of a third microtrap, and we determine the experimental
conditions for which the overlap of the wave functions leads to an efficient
transfer. There is a close analogy with the Franck-Condon principle in the
spectroscopy of molecules. Spin-dependent manipulation of neutral atoms in
microtraps has important applications in quantum information processing. We
also show that starting with several atoms, precisely one atom can be
transferred to the final potential well hence giving deterministic preparation
of single atoms.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Theory of monochromatic wave field amplification in a waveguide array based
on expansion of the wave field in terms of guided array modes is developed.
Equations for the expansion coefficients include cross-modal gain, which
completely changes behavior of the amplified wave field. Analysis of two-mode
amplification reveals new unusual features in characteristics of two-mode
amplifier. Instead of unlimited growth of both modes for incoherent fields, one
of the modes grows with no limit and suppresses the lower-power mode. Effects
associated with the cross-modal gain are illustrated analytically on a system
of two thin parallel planar waveguides. Conditions are found when a mode with
lower gain can become the dominant one at the output of amplifier.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We present general analytical expressions of Stokes and anti-Stokes spectral
photon-flux densities that are spontaneously generated by a single
monochromatic pump wave propagating in a single-mode optical fiber. We validate
our results by comparing them with experimental data. Limiting cases of the
general expressions corresponding to interesting physical situations are
discussed.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, math-ph, math.MP, nlin.SI, physics.class-ph, physics.flu-dyn, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is shown how to model weakly dissipative free-surface flows using the
classical potential flow approach. The Helmholtz-Leray decomposition is applied
to the linearized 3D Navier-Stokes equations. The governing equations are
treated using Fourier--Laplace transforms. We show how to express the vortical
component of the velocity only in terms of the potential and free-surface
elevation. A new predominant nonlocal viscous term is derived in the bottom
kinematic boundary condition. The resulting formulation is simple and does not
involve any correction procedure as in previous viscous potential flow theories
[Joseph2004]. Corresponding long wave model equations are derived.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.ins-det
Abstract: We present first, encouraging results obtained with an experimental apparatus
based on Coherent Population Trapping and aimed at detecting biological
(cardiac) magnetic field in magnetically compensated, but unshielded volume.
The work includes magnetic-field and magnetic-field-gradient compensation and
uses differential detection for cancellation of (common mode) magnetic noise.
Synchronous data acquisition with a reference (electro-cardiographic or
pulse-oximetric) signal allows for improving the S/N in an off-line averaging.
The set-up has the relevant advantages of working at room temperature with a
small-size head, and of allowing for fast adjustments of the dc bias magnetic
field, which results in making the sensor suitable for detecting the
bio-magnetic signal at any orientation with respect to the heart axis and in
any position around the patient chest, which is not the case with other kinds
of magnetometers.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The paper offers a discrete thermodynamic model of lasers. Laser is an open
system; its equilibrium is based on a balance of two thermodynamic forces, one
related to the incoming pumping power and another to the emitted light. The
basic expression for such equilibrium is a logistic map, graphical solutions to
which are pitchfork bifurcation diagrams. As pumping force increases, the
relative populations on the ground and lasing branches tend to zero and unity
correspondingly. An interesting feature of this model is the line spectrum of
the up and down transitions between the branches beyond bifurcation point. Even
in a simple case of 2-level laser with only 2 possible transition types (up and
down), the spectra look like sets of the line packets, starting well before the
population inversion. This effect is an independent confirmation of the
Einstein's prohibition on practical realization of 2-level laser. Multilevel
lasers may be approached by employing the idea of thermodynamic activity for
the emitting atoms. Considering coefficient of thermodynamic activity of the
lasing level atoms to be proportional to the ratio of life times on the upper
and lasing (the 3d) levels, one can derive a new basic map for the multilevel
laser system. For a modest ratio only of 0.01, spontaneous transitions between
levels are pushed to the area beyond population inversion, opening a space for
the functioning of laser.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: An improved method for the description of hierarchical complex systems by
means of a Fokker-Planck equation is presented. In particular the
limited-memory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm for constraint
problems (L-BFGS-B) is used to minimize the distance between the numerical
solutions of the Fokker-Planck equation and the empirical probability density
functions and thus to estimate properly the drift and diffusion term of the
Fokker-Planck equation. The optimisation routine is applied to a time series of
velocity measurements obtained from a turbulent helium gas jet in order to
demonstrate the benefits and to quantify the improvements of this new
optimisation routine.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The results of quantitative analysis of word distribution in two fables in
Ukrainian by Ivan Franko: "Mykyta the Fox" and "Abu-Kasym's slippers" are
reported. Our study consists of two parts: the analysis of frequency-rank
distributions and the application of complex networks theory. The analysis of
frequency-rank distributions shows that the text sizes are enough to observe
statistical properties. The power-law character of these distributions (Zipf's
law) holds in the region of rank variable r=20 - 3000 with an exponent
$\alpha\simeq 1$. This substantiates the choice of the above texts to analyse
typical properties of the language complex network on their basis. Besides, an
applicability of the Simon model to describe non-asymptotic properties of word
distributions is evaluated.
  In describing language as a complex network, usually the words are associated
with nodes, whereas one may give different meanings to the network links. This
results in different network representations. In the second part of the paper,
we give different representations of the language network and perform
comparative analysis of their characteristics. Our results demonstrate that the
language network of Ukrainian is a strongly correlated scale-free small world.
Empirical data obtained may be useful for theoretical description of language
evolution.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We discuss the properties of ultracold Rydberg atoms in a Ioffe-Pritchard
magnetic field configuration. The derived two-body Hamiltonian unveils how the
large size of Rydberg atoms affects their coupling to the inhomogeneous
magnetic field. The properties of the compound electronic and center of mass
quantum states are thoroughly analyzed. We find very tight confinement of the
center of mass motion in two dimensions to be achievable while barely changing
the electronic structure compared to the field free case. This paves the way
for generating a one-dimensional ultracold quantum Rydberg gas.

Categories: nlin.CD, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We show that there is a link between the Kuramoto paradigm and another system
of synchronized oscillators, namely an electrical power distribution grid of
generators and consumers. The purpose of this work is to show both the formal
analogy and some practical consequences. The mapping can be made quantitative,
and under some necessary approximations a class of Kuramoto-like models, those
with bimodal distribution of the frequencies, is most appropriate for the
power-grid. In fact in the power-grid there are two kinds of oscillators: the
'sources' delivering power to the 'consumers'.

Categories: physics.med-ph, q-bio.NC
Abstract: The present paper introduces an original biofeedback system for improving
human balance control, whose underlying principle consists in providing
additional sensory information related to foot sole pressure distribution to
the user through a tongue-placed tactile output device. To assess the effect of
this biofeedback system on postural control during quiet standing, ten young
healthy adults were asked to stand as immobile as possible with their eyes
closed in two conditions of No-biofeedback and Biofeedback. Centre of foot
pressure (CoP) displacements were recorded using a force platform. Results
showed reduced CoP displacements in the Biofeedback relative to the
No-biofeedback condition. The present findings evidenced the ability of the
central nervous system to efficiently integrate an artificial plantar-based,
tongue-placed tactile biofeedback for controlling control posture during quiet
standing.

Categories: physics.hist-ph
Abstract: In this paper I discuss Enrico Fermi's view of identical particles, taking a
lecture that he gave in 1933 as a starting point. Fermi used his lecture as a
basis for a paper that was published in 1934: the paper is in italian and is
not easily accessible to a wide audience, and for this reason its translation
is also given in a section of the present paper.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.mes-hall, cond-mat.stat-mech, nucl-th, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The resonant state of the open quantum system is studied from the viewpoint
of the outgoing momentum flux. We show that the number of particles is
conserved for a resonant state, if we use an expanding volume of integration in
order to take account of the outgoing momentum flux; the number of particles
would decay exponentially in a fixed volume of integration. Moreover, we
introduce new numerical methods of treating the resonant state with the use of
the effective potential. We first give a numerical method of finding a
resonance pole in the complex energy plane. The method seeks an energy
eigenvalue iteratively. We found that our method leads to a super-convergence,
the convergence exponential with respect to the iteration step. The present
method is completely independent of commonly used complex scaling. We also give
a numerical trick for computing the time evolution of the resonant state in a
limited spatial area. Since the wave function of the resonant state is
diverging away from the scattering potential, it has been previously difficult
to follow its time evolution numerically in a finite area.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, astro-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In order to explore the magnetostrophic regime expected for planetary cores,
experiments have been conducted in a rotating sphere filled with liquid sodium,
with an imposed dipolar magnetic field (the DTS setup). The field is produced
by a permanent magnet enclosed in an inner sphere, which can rotate at a
separate rate, producing a spherical Couette flow. The flow properties are
investigated by measuring electric potentials on the outer sphere, the induced
magnetic field in the laboratory frame, and velocity profiles inside the liquid
sodium using ultrasonic Doppler velocimetry. The present article focuses on the
time-averaged axisymmetric part of the flow. The Doppler profiles show that the
angular velocity of the fluid is relatively uniform in most of the fluid shell,
but rises near the inner sphere, revealing the presence of a magnetic wind, and
gently drops towards the outer sphere. The transition from a magnetostrophic
flow near the inner sphere to a geostrophic flow near the outer sphere is
controlled by the local Elsasser number. For Rossby numbers up to order 1, the
observed velocity profiles all show a similar shape. Numerical simulations in
the linear regime are computed, and synthetic velocity profiles are compared
with the measured ones. In the geostrophic region, a torque-balance model
provides very good predictions. We find that the induced magnetic field varies
in a consistent fashion, and displays a peculiar peak in the counter-rotating
regime. This happens when the fluid rotation rate is almost equal and opposite
to the outer sphere rotation rate. The fluid is then almost at rest in the
laboratory frame, and the Proudman-Taylor constraint vanishes, enabling a
strong meridional flow. We suggest that dynamo action might be favored in such
a situation.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Propagation, transmission and reflection properties of linearly polarized
plane waves and arbitrarily short electromagnetic pulses in one-dimensional
dispersionless dielectric media possessing an arbitrary space-time dependence
of the refractive index are studied by using a two-component, highly symmetric
version of Maxwell's equations. The use of any slow varying amplitude
approximation is avoided. Transfer matrices of sharp nonstationary interfaces
are calculated explicitly, together with the amplitudes of all secondary waves
produced in the scattering. Time-varying multilayer structures and
spatiotemporal lenses in various configurations are investigated analytically
and numerically in a unified approach. Several new effects are reported, such
as pulse compression, broadening and spectral manipulation of pulses by a
spatiotemporal lens, and the closure of the forbidden frequency gaps with the
subsequent opening of wavenumber bandgaps in a generalized Bragg reflector.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The strong-property-fluctuation theory (SPFT) provides a sophisticated means
of estimating the effective constitutive parameters of a homogenized composite
material (HCM), which takes account of the statistical distribution of the
component particles. We present an extended version of the third-order SPFT in
which the component particles are represented as depolarization regions of
nonzero volume. Numerical results are provided for a bianisotropic
homogenization scenario wherein the HCM is a Faraday chiral medium. Thereby,
convergence of the extended SPFT at the second-order level of approximation is
demonstrated within the long-wavelength regime.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: In the work, the new method for the design of the wavelength division
multiplexer on the basis of 2D photonic crystal integrated circuit for the
ultra-short pulses channel separation is proposed and investigated. The method
is based on the analysis of full photonic bandgap maps that allows defining the
ultra-short pulse demultiplexer parameters selection. For the method
approbation, there was synthesized the device in which the wideband filters are
used for the channel separation. As it was expected, the device effectively
separates 50 fs pulse channels with 1.31 and 1.55 microns wavelengths. The
obtained spectral characteristics and pulse pattern responses validate the
efficiency of the proposed method and the applicability of such devices to the
integrated photonic information processing circuits.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We propose that the rich-club phenomena in complex networks should be defined
in the spirit of bootstrapping, in which a null model is adopted to assess the
statistical significance of the rich-club detected. Our method can be served as
a definition of rich-club phenomenon and is applied to analyzing three real
networks and three model networks. The results improve significantly compared
with previously reported results. We report a dilemma with an exceptional
example, showing that there does not exist an omnipotent definition for the
rich-club phenomenon.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report the fast accumulation of a large number of metastable 52Cr atoms in
a mixed trap, formed by the superposition of a strongly confining optical trap
and a quadrupolar magnetic trap. The steady state is reached after about 400
ms, providing a cloud of more than one million metastable atoms at a
temperature of about 100 microK, with a peak density of 10^{18} atoms.m^{-3}.
We have optimized the loading procedure, and measured the light shift of the
5D4 state by analyzing how the trapped atoms respond to a parametric
excitation. We compare this result to a theoretical evaluation based on the
available spectroscopic data for chromium atoms.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Historically, the thermodynamic behavior of gasses was described first and
the derived equations were adapted to solids. It is suggested that the current
thermodynamic description of solid phase is still incomplete because the
isothermal work done on or by the system is not counted in the internal energy.
It is also suggested that the isobaric work should not be deducted from the
internal energy because the system does not do work when it expands. Further
more it is suggested that Joule postulate regarding the mechanical equivalency
of heat -the first law of thermodynamics- is not universal and not applicable
to elastic solids. The equations for the proposed thermodynamic description of
solids are derived and tested by calculating the internal energies of the
system using the equation of state of MgO. The agreement with theory is good.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: A new system, consisting of a double channel Fabry Perot etalon and laser
diodes emitting around 780 nm is described and proposed to be used for air
refractive index measurements. The principle of this refractometer is based on
frequency measurements between optical laser sources. It permits
quasi-instantaneous measurement with a resolution better than and uncertainty
in the range. Some preliminary results on the stability of this system and the
measurements of the refractive index of air with this apparatus are presented.
The first measurements of the index of air at 780 nm are, within an
experimental uncertainty of the order of, in agreement with the predicted
values by the so-called revised Edl\'en equations. This result is to the best
of our knowledge the first to extend to the near infra-red the validity of the
revised Edl\'en equation derived for the wavelength range 350- 650 nm.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We describe a general framework for avoiding spurious eigenvalues --
unphysical unstable eigenvalues that often occur in hydrodynamic stability
problems. In two example problems, we show that when system stability is
analyzed numerically using {\em descriptor} notation, spurious eigenvalues are
eliminated. Descriptor notation is a generalized eigenvalue formulation for
differential-algebraic equations that explicitly retains algebraic constraints.
We propose that spurious eigenvalues are likely to occur when algebraic
constraints are used to analytically reduce the number of independent variables
in a differential-algebraic system of equations before the system is
approximated numerically. In contrast, the simple and easily generalizable
descriptor framework simultaneously solves the differential equations and
algebraic constraints and is well-suited to stability analysis in these
systems.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We apply the new dynamics of 3-space to cosmology by deriving a Hubble
expansion solution. This dynamics involves two constants; G and alpha - the
fine structure constant. This solution gives an excellent parameter-free fit to
the recent supernova and gamma-ray burst data without the need for `dark
energy' or `dark matter'. The data and theory together imply an older age for
the universe of some 14.7Gyrs. Various problems such as fine tuning, the event
horizon problem etc are now resolved. A brief review discusses the origin of
the 3-space dynamics and how that dynamics explained the bore hole anomaly,
spiral galaxy flat rotation speeds, the masses of black holes in spherical
galaxies, gravitational light bending and lensing, all without invoking `dark
matter' or `dark energy'. These developments imply that a new understanding of
the universe is now available.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A general formalism is used to express the long-range potential energies in
inverse powers of the separation distance between two like atomic or molecular
systems with $P$ symmetries. The long-range molecular interaction coefficients
are calculated for the molecular symmetries $\Delta$, $\Pi$, and $\Sigma$,
arising from the following interactions: He($2 ^1P$)--He($2 ^1P$), He($2
^1P$)--He($2 ^3P$), and He($2 ^3P$)--He($2 ^3P$). The electric
quadrupole-quadrupole term, $C_{5}$, the van der Waals (dispersion) term
$C_{6}$, and higher-order terms, $C_{8}$, and $C_{10}$, are calculated
\textit{ab initio} using accurate variational wave functions in Hylleraas
coordinates with finite nuclear mass effects. A comparison is made with
previously published results where available.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The theory for large amplitude circularly polarized waves propagating along
an external magnetic field is extended in order to include also vacuum
polarization effects. A general dispersion relation, which unites previous
results, is derived.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: A small-scale, trapezoidal rigid body in the gas-filled gap between two
parallel plates at different temperatures is considered. An analytical
expression for the force onto the body in the direction parallel to the plates
valid for an infinite Knudsen number is derived. Simultaneously, Monte-Carlo
simulations are performed allowing to extend the analysis to Knudsen numbers of
the order of one. The numerical and the analytical results show excellent
agreement, indicating that a temperature gradient orthogonal to the plates can
induce a significant force in parallel direction. This force is only slightly
reduced when a Knudsen number of one is considered. In the future, the
discovered effect may be exploited for the conversion of thermal into
mechanical energy in nanomachines.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.ins-det
Abstract: An automated magnetometer suitable for long lasting measurement under stable
and controllable experimental conditions has been implemented. The device is
based on Coherent Population Trapping (CPT) produced by a multi-frequency
excitation. CPT resonance is observed when a frequency comb, generated by diode
laser current modulation, excites Cs atoms confined in a
$\pi/4\times(2.5)^2\times1 \textrm{cm}^3$, 2 Torr $N_2$ buffered cell. A fully
optical sensor is connected through an optical fiber to the laser head allowing
for truly remote sensing and minimization of the field perturbation. A detailed
analysis of the CPT resonance parameters as a function of the optical detuning
has been made in order to get high sensitivity measurements. The magnetic field
monitoring performances and the best sensitivity obtained in a balanced
differential configuration of the sensor are presented.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Extracting understanding from the growing ``sea'' of biological and
socio-economic data is one of the most pressing scientific challenges facing
us. Here, we introduce and validate an unsupervised method that is able to
accurately extract the hierarchical organization of complex biological, social,
and technological networks. We define an ensemble of hierarchically nested
random graphs, which we use to validate the method. We then apply our method to
real-world networks, including the air-transportation network, an electronic
circuit, an email exchange network, and metabolic networks. We find that our
method enables us to obtain an accurate multi-scale descriptions of a complex
system.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: We report an experimental demonstration of a complied version of Shor's
algorithm using four photonic qubits. We choose the simplest instance of this
algorithm, that is, factorization of N=15 in the case that the period $r=2$ and
exploit a simplified linear optical network to coherently implement the quantum
circuits of the modular exponential execution and semi-classical quantum
Fourier transformation. During this computation, genuine multiparticle
entanglement is observed which well supports its quantum nature. This
experiment represents a step toward full realization of Shor's algorithm and
scalable linear optics quantum computation.

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.PS
Abstract: We observe experimentally higher-order solitons in waveguide arrays with
defocusing saturable nonlinearity. Such solitons can comprise several in-phase
bright spots and are stable above a critical power threshold. We elucidate the
impact of the nonlinearity saturation on the domains of existence and stability
of the observed complex soliton states.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Arguments showing that exchange-only optimized effective potential (xOEP)
methods, with finite basis sets, cannot in general yield the Hartree-Fock (HF)
ground state energy, but a higher one, are given. While the orbital products of
a complete basis are linearly dependent, the HF ground state energy can only be
obtained via a basis set xOEP scheme in the special case that all products of
occupied and unoccupied orbitals emerging from the employed orbital basis set
are linearly independent from each other. In this case, however, exchange
potentials leading to the HF ground state energy exhibit unphysical
oscillations and do not represent a Kohn-Sham (KS) exchange potential. These
findings solve the seemingly paradoxical results of Staroverov, Scuseria and
Davidson that certain finite basis set xOEP calculations lead to the HF ground
state energy despite the fact that within a real space (or complete basis)
representation the xOEP ground state energy is always higher than the HF
energy. Moreover, whether or not the occupied and unoccupied orbital products
are linearly independent, it is shown that basis set xOEP methods only
represent exact exchange-only (EXX) KS methods, i.e., proper density-functional
methods, if the orbital basis set and the auxiliary basis set representing the
exchange potential are balanced to each other, i.e., if the orbital basis is
comprehensive enough for a given auxiliary basis. Otherwise xOEP methods do not
represent EXX KS methods and yield unphysical exchange potentials.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.mes-hall, gr-qc, physics.optics
Abstract: We provide a general framework to describe cooling of a micromechanical
oscillator to its quantum ground state by means of radiation-pressure coupling
with a driven optical cavity. We apply it to two experimentally realized
schemes, back-action cooling via a detuned cavity and cold-damping
quantum-feedback cooling, and we determine the ultimate quantum limits of both
schemes for the full parameter range of a stable cavity. While both allow to
reach the oscillator's quantum ground state, we find that back-action cooling
is more efficient in the good cavity limit, i.e. when the cavity bandwidth is
smaller than the mechanical frequency, while cold damping is more suitable for
the bad cavity limit. The results of previous treatments are recovered as
limiting cases of specific parameter regimes.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: We extend a quantum model in Hilbert space developed in Aerts (2007a) into a
quantum field theoric model in Fock space for the modeling of the combination
of concepts. Items and concepts are represented by vectors in Fock space and
membership weights of items are modeled by quantum probabilities. We apply this
theory to model the disjunction of concepts and show that the predictions of
our theory for the membership weights of items regarding the disjunction of
concepts match with great accuracy the complete set of results of an experiment
conducted by Hampton (1988b). It are the quantum effects of interference and
superposition of that are at the origin of the effects of overextension and
underextension observed by Hampton as deviations from a classical use of the
disjunction. It is essential for the perfect matches we obtain between the
predictions of the quantum field model and Hampton's experimental data that
items can be in superpositions of `different numbers states' which proves that
the genuine structure of quantum field theory is needed to match predictions
with experimental data.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Secular variations of the geomagnetic field have been measured with a
continuously improving accuracy during the last few hundred years, culminating
nowadays with satellite data. It is however well known that the dynamics of the
magnetic field is linked to that of the velocity field in the core and any
attempt to model secular variations will involve a coupled dynamical system for
magnetic field and core velocity. Unfortunately, there is no direct observation
of the velocity. Independently of the exact nature of the above-mentioned
coupled system -- some version being currently under construction -- the
question is debated in this paper whether good knowledge of the magnetic field
can be translated into good knowledge of core dynamics. Furthermore, what will
be the impact of the most recent and precise geomagnetic data on our knowledge
of the geomagnetic field of the past and future? These questions are cast into
the language of variational data assimilation, while the dynamical system
considered in this paper consists in a set of two oversimplified
one-dimensional equations for magnetic and velocity fields. This toy model
retains important features inherited from the induction and Navier-Stokes
equations: non-linear magnetic and momentum terms are present and its linear
response to small disturbances contains Alfv\'en waves. It is concluded that
variational data assimilation is indeed appropriate in principle, even though
the velocity field remains hidden at all times; it allows us to recover the
entire evolution of both fields from partial and irregularly distributed
information on the magnetic field. This work constitutes a first step on the
way toward the reassimilation of historical geomagnetic data and geomagnetic
forecast.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.data-an
Abstract: We present a new model for the propagation of polarized light in a random
birefringent medium. This model is based on a decomposition of the higher order
statistics of the reduced Stokes parameters along the irreducible
representations of the rotation group. We show how this model allows a detailed
description of the propagation, giving analytical expressions for the
probability densities of the Mueller matrix and the Stokes vector throughout
the propagation. It also allows an exact description of the evolution of
averaged quantities, such as the degree of polarization. We will also discuss
how this model allows a generalization of the concepts of reduced Stokes
parameters and degree of polarization to higher order statistics. We give some
notes on how it can be extended to more general random media.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: H-index, proposed by Hirsch is a good indicator of the impact of a
scientist's research. When evaluating departments, institutions or labs, the
importance of h-index can be further enhanced when properly calibrated for
size. Particularly acute is the issue of federally funded facilities whose
number of actively publishing scientists frequently dwarfs that of academic
departments. Recently Molinari and Molinari developed a methodology that shows
the h-index has a universal growth rate for large numbers of papers, allowing
for meaningful comparisons between institutions.
  An additional challenge when comparing large institutions is that fields have
distinct internal cultures, with different typical rates of publication and
citation; biology is more highly cited than physics, which is more highly cited
than engineering. For this reason, this study has focused on the physical
sciences, engineering, and technology, and has excluded bio-medical research.
Comparisons between individual disciplines are reported here to provide
contextual framework. Generally, it was found that the universal growth rate of
Molinari and Molinari holds well across all the categories considered,
testifying to the robustness of both their growth law and our results.
  The overall goal here is to set the highest standard of comparison for
federal investment in science; comparisons are made with the nations preeminent
private and public institutions. We find that many among the national
facilities compare favorably in research impact with the nations leading
universities.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Comment on six papers published by M.A. El-Hakiem and his co-workers in
International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, Journal of Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials and Heat and Mass Transfer

Categories: astro-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: To deflect impact-trajectory of massive km^3 and spinning asteroid by a few
terrestrial radius one need a large momentum exchange. The dragging of huge
spinning bodies in space by external engine seems difficult or impossible. Our
solution is based on the landing of multi screw-rockets, powered by
mini-nuclear engines, on the body, that dig a small fraction of the soil
surface, to use as an exhaust propeller, ejecting it vertically in phase among
themselves. Such a mass ejection increases the momentum exchange, their number
redundancy guarantees the stability of the system. The slow landing (below 40
cm s^-1) of each engine-unity at those lowest gravity field, may be achieved by
save rolling and bouncing along the surface. The engine array tuned activity,
overcomes the asteroid angular velocity. Coherent turning of the jet heads
increases the deflection efficiency. A procession along its surface may
compensate at best the asteroid spin. A small skin-mass (about 2 10^4 tons) may
be ejected by mini nuclear engines. Such prototypes may also build first save
galleries for humans on the Moon. Conclusive deflecting tests might be
performed on remote asteroids. The incoming asteroid 99942 Apophis (just 2% of
km^3) may be deflected safely a few Earth radius. How to tag its trajectory is
described. Its encounter maybe not just a hazard but an opportunity, learning
how to land, dig, build and also to nest save human station inside. Asteroids
amplified deflections by gravity swing maybe driven into longest planetary
journeys. Mars journey may benefict by Phobos natural asteroid parking and
fueling role.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We review the recent developments in the field of photonic lattices
emphasizing their unique properties for controlling linear and nonlinear
propagation of light. We draw some important links between optical lattices and
photonic crystals pointing towards practical applications in optical
communications and computing, beam shaping, and bio-sensing.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.med-ph
Abstract: We present a method for the direct and continuous separation of red and white
blood cells from plasma at the microscale. The method is implemented in a
microfluidic system with magnetic functionality. The fluidic structure within
the microsystem consists of an inlet and a single microfluidic channel with
multiple outlets. The magnetic functionality is provided by an array of
integrated soft-magnetic elements that are embedded transverse and adjacent to
the microchannel. The elements are magnetized using an external field, and once
magnetized they produce a magnetic force on blood cells as they flow through
the microchannel. In whole blood, white blood cells (WBCs) behave as
diamagnetic microparticles, while red blood cells (RBCs) exhibit diamagnetic or
paramagnetic behavior depending on the oxygenation of their hemoglobin. We
study the motion of blood cells through the microchannel using a mathematical
model that takes into account the magnetic, fluidic and gravitational forces on
the cells. We use the model to study blood cell separation, and our analysis
indicates that the microsystem is capable of separating WBC-rich plasma,
deoxygenated RBC-rich plasma and cell-depleted plasma into respective outlets.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Time evolution of the cities and of the languages is considered in terms of
multiplicative noise and fragmentation processes; where power law (Pareto-Zipf
law) and slightly asymmetric log-normal (Gauss) distribution result for the
size distribution of the cities and for that of the languages, respectively.
The cities and the languages are treated differently (and as connected; for
example, the languages split in terms of splitting the cities, etc.) and thus
two distributions are obtained in the same computation at the same time.
Evolutions of lifetimes and families for the cities and the languages are also
studied. We suggest that the regularities may be evolving out of randomness, in
terms of the relevant processes.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A vector field splitting approach is discussed for the systematic derivation
of numerical propagators for deterministic dynamics. Based on the formalism, a
class of numerical integrators for Langevin dynamics are presented for single
and multiple timestep algorithms.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, cond-mat.soft, physics.chem-ph, q-bio.BM
Abstract: The prediction of the three-dimensional native structure of proteins from the
knowledge of their amino acid sequence, known as the protein folding problem,
is one of the most important yet unsolved issues of modern science. Since the
conformational behaviour of flexible molecules is nothing more than a complex
physical problem, increasingly more physicists are moving into the study of
protein systems, bringing with them powerful mathematical and computational
tools, as well as the sharp intuition and deep images inherent to the physics
discipline. This work attempts to facilitate the first steps of such a
transition. In order to achieve this goal, we provide an exhaustive account of
the reasons underlying the protein folding problem enormous relevance and
summarize the present-day status of the methods aimed to solving it. We also
provide an introduction to the particular structure of these biological
heteropolymers, and we physically define the problem stating the assumptions
behind this (commonly implicit) definition. Finally, we review the 'special
flavor' of statistical mechanics that is typically used to study the
astronomically large phase spaces of macromolecules. Throughout the whole work,
much material that is found scattered in the literature has been put together
here to improve comprehension and to serve as a handy reference.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We calculated the dynamics of nuclear wave packets in coupled
electron-vibration systems and their nonlinear optical responses. We found that
the quantized nature of the vibrational modes is observed in pump-probe spectra
particularly in weakly interacting electron-vibration systems such as cyanine
dye molecules. Calculated results based on a harmonic potential model and
molecular orbital calculations are compared with experimental results, and we
also found that the materials parameters regarding with the geometrical
structure of potential energy surfaces are directly determined by accurate
measurement of time-resolved spectra.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is well-known that a classical point charge in 1+1 D hyperbolic motion in
space and time is reaction-free. But this is a special case of a larger set of
reaction-free trajectories that in general are curved paths through space, i.e.
in 2+1 D. This note catalogs the full family of reaction-free trajectories,
giving a geometrical interpretation by which means the curved path possibility
is easily related to the better known case of hyperbolic motion in 1+1 D.
Motivated by the geometry, it is shown how the catalog of motions can be
naturally extended to include the possibility of lossless reaction-free closed
spatial orbits that turn out to be classical pair creation and destruction
events. The extended theory can accommodate a vacuum plenum of classical
current that could be regarded as a classical version of the Fermionic ZPF of
QFT, reminiscent of the relationship between the Electromagnetic ZPF and the
classical imitation that characterizes `Stochastic Electrodynamics'.

Categories: nlin.PS, physics.optics
Abstract: Optical gap solitons, which exist due to a balance of nonlinearity and
dispersion due to a Bragg grating, can couple to acoustic waves through
electrostriction. This gives rise to a new species of ``gap-acoustic'' solitons
(GASs), for which we find exact analytic solutions. The GAS consists of an
optical pulse similar to the optical gap soliton, dressed by an accompanying
phonon pulse. Close to the speed of sound, the phonon component is large. In
subsonic (supersonic) solitons, the phonon pulse is a positive (negative)
density variation. Coupling to the acoustic field damps the solitons'
oscillatory instability, and gives rise to a distinct instability for
supersonic solitons, which may make the GAS decelerate and change direction,
ultimately making the soliton subsonic.

Categories: astro-ph, math-ph, math.MP, nlin.SI, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Hall drift, i. e., transport of magnetic flux by the moving electrons giving
rise to the electrical current, may be the dominant effect causing the
evolution of the magnetic field in the solid crust of neutron stars. It is a
nonlinear process that, despite a number of efforts, is still not fully
understood. We use the Hall induction equation in axial symmetry to obtain some
general properties of nonevolving fields, as well as analyzing the evolution of
purely toroidal fields, their poloidal perturbations, and current-free, purely
poloidal fields. We also analyze energy conservation in Hall instabilities and
write down a variational principle for Hall equilibria. We show that the
evolution of any toroidal magnetic field can be described by Burgers' equation,
as previously found in plane-parallel geometry. It leads to sharp current
sheets that dissipate on the Hall time scale, yielding a stationary field
configuration that depends on a single, suitably defined coordinate. This
field, however, is unstable to poloidal perturbations, which grow as their
field lines are stretched by the background electron flow, as in instabilities
earlier found numerically. On the other hand, current-free poloidal
configurations are stable and could represent a long-lived crustal field
supported by currents in the fluid stellar core.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Electron-positron pair creation due to combined nuclear Coulomb and strong
laser fields is investigated for the tunneling regime. The energy spectra and
angular distributions of the pair are found analytically for the first time.
The energy spectrum for each lepton exhibits a sharp maximum located well above
the threshold for any polarization of the laser field. The angular
distributions of leptons depend on the polarization: for the linear
polarization both leptons move predominantly along the laser beam direction;
for the circular polarization leptons are emitted in a thin-walled cone
centered on the laser beam. The spectral and angular distributions found are
governed by the intensity and frequency of the field, and the frequency
independent total pair creation rates comply with the previously known results.
A new method of calculation - the vicinal approximation - which uses the fact
that the pair production takes place in the close vicinity of the nucleus, is
suggested.

Categories: quant-ph, math-ph, math.MP, nucl-th, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We show in detail how the Jordan-Wigner transformation can be used to
simulate any fermionic many-body Hamiltonian on a quantum computer. We develop
an algorithm based on appropriate qubit gates that takes a general fermionic
Hamiltonian, written as products of a given number of creation and annihilation
operators, as input. To demonstrate the applicability of the algorithm, we
calculate eigenvalues and eigenvectors of two model Hamiltonians, the
well-known Hubbard model and a generalized pairing Hamiltonian. Extensions to
other systems are discussed.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: Author details research on the new, very prospective, electrostatic Space
Elevator climber based on a new electrostatic linear engine previously offered
at the 42nd Joint Propulsion Conference (AIAA-2006-5229) and published in AEAT,
Vol.78, No.6, 2006, pp. 502-508. The electrostatic climber discussed can have
any speed (and braking), the energy for climber movement is delivered by a
lightweight high-voltage line into a Space Elevator-holding cable from Earth
electric generator. This electric line also can be used for delivery electric
energy to a Geosynchronous Space Station. At present, the best solution of the
climber problem (announced by NASA as one important awarding problem of Space
Elevator) is problematic.
  Author also shows the linear electrostatic engine may be used as realistic
power space launcher at the present time. Two projects illustrate these new
devices.
  Key words: Space elevator, Electrostatic climber for space elevator,
Electrostatic space launcher, Electrostatic accelerator.
  This work is presented as paper AIAA-2007-5838 for 43 Joint Propulsion
Conference, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA, 9-11 July, 2007,

Categories: q-fin.PM, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We employ perturbation analysis technique to study multi-asset portfolio
optimisation with transaction cost. We allow for correlations in risky assets
and obtain optimal trading methods for general utility functions. Our
analytical results are supported by numerical simulations in the context of the
Long Term Growth Model.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, cond-mat.soft, math-ph, math.HO, math.MP, math.PR, physics.chem-ph, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: We describe in detail the history of Brownian motion, as well as the
contributions of Einstein, Sutherland, Smoluchowski, Bachelier, Perrin and
Langevin to its theory. The always topical importance in physics of the theory
of Brownian motion is illustrated by recent biophysical experiments, where it
serves, for instance, for the measurement of the pulling force on a single DNA
molecule.
  In a second part, we stress the mathematical importance of the theory of
Brownian motion, illustrated by two chosen examples. The by-now classic
representation of the Newtonian potential by Brownian motion is explained in an
elementary way. We conclude with the description of recent progress seen in the
geometry of the planar Brownian curve. At its heart lie the concepts of
conformal invariance and multifractality, associated with the potential theory
of the Brownian curve itself.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We remind the reader that it is possible to tell if two or more eigenvalues
of a matrix are equal, without calculating the eigenvalues. We then use this
property to detect (avoided) crossings in the spectra of quantum Hamiltonians
representable by matrices. This approach provides a pedagogical introduction to
(avoided) crossings, is capable of handling realistic Hamiltonians
analytically, and offers a way to visualize crossings which is sometimes
superior to that provided by the spectrum. We illustrate the method using the
Breit-Rabi Hamiltonian to describe the hyperfine-Zeeman structure of the ground
state hydrogen atom in a uniform magnetic field.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, cond-mat.soft, physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We present measurements on the spontaneous imbibition (capillary rise) of
water, a linear hydrocarbon (n-C16H34) and a liquid crystal (8OCB) into the
pore space of monolithic, nanoporous Vycor glass (mean pore radius 5 nm).
Measurements on the mass uptake of the porous hosts as a function of time,
m(t), are in good agreement with the Lucas-Washburn square root of time
prediction, typical of imbibition of liquids into porous hosts. The relative
capillary rise velocities scale as expected from the bulk fluid parameters.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In this paper we demonstrate a technique of utilizing magnetically trapped
neutral Rb-87 atoms to measure the magnitude and direction of stray electric
fields emanating from surface contaminants. We apply an alternating external
electric field that adds to (or subtracts from) the stray field in such a way
as to resonantly drive the trapped atoms into a mechanical dipole oscillation.
The growth rate of the oscillation's amplitude provides information about the
magnitude and sign of the stray field gradient. Using this measurement
technique, we are able to reconstruct the vector electric field produced by
surface contaminants. In addition, we can accurately measure the electric
fields generated from adsorbed atoms purposely placed onto the surface and
account for their systematic effects, which can plague a precision
surface-force measurement. We show that baking the substrate can reduce the
electric fields emanating from adsorbate, and that the mechanism for reduction
is likely surface diffusion, not desorption.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The 200 K protein dynamical transition is observed for the first time in the
teraherz dielectric response. The complex dielectric permittivity $\epsilon$ =
$\epsilon$' + i$\epsilon$" is determined in the 0.2 - 2.0 THz and 80-294 K
ranges. $\epsilon$" has a linear temperature dependence up to 200 K then
sharply increases. The low temperature linear dependence in $\epsilon$"
indicates anharmonicity for temperatures 80 K < T < 180 K, challenging the
assumed harmonicity below 200K. The temperature dependence is consistent with
beta relaxation response and shows the protein motions involved in the
dynamical transition extend to subpicosecond time scales.

Categories: physics.class-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: A proof is given of the vector identity proposed by Gubarev, Stodolsky and
Zakarov that relates the volume integral of the square of a 3-vector field to
non-local integrals of the curl and divergence of the field. The identity is
applied to the case of the magnetic vector potential and magnetic field of a
rotating charged shell. The latter provides a straightforward exercise in the
use of the addition theorem of spherical harmonics.

Categories: q-fin.PM, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In Biology, all motor enzymes operate on the same principle: they trap
favourable brownian fluctuations in order to generate directed forces and to
move. Whether it is possible or not to copy one such strategy to play the
market was the starting point of our investigations. We found the answer is
yes. In this paper we describe one such strategy and appraise its performance
with historical data from the European Monetary System (EMS), the US Dow Jones,
the german Dax and the french Cac40.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, q-fin.ST
Abstract: Generalisation of the El Farol bar problem to that of many bars here leads to
the Kolkata restaurant problem, where the decision to go to any restaurant or
not is much simpler (depending on the previous experience of course, as in the
El Farol bar problem). This generalised problem can be exactly analysed in some
limiting cases discussed here. The fluctuation in the restaurant service can be
shown to have precisely an inverse cubic behavior, as widely seen in the stock
market fluctuations.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Writing the boundary integral equation for an exterior problem of elasticity
is subordinate so far to hypotheses on the asymptotical behaviour at infinity
of solutions. The sufficient conditions met in the literature are too
restrictive and do not notably cover the case when the loading has a non zero
resultant force. This difficulty can be removed by considering the problem in
displacements relatively to one point located at a finite distance from the
loading. Finally, this auxiliary problem allows widening the conditions of
validity of the usual formulation of the direct integral method.

Categories: math-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, gr-qc, hep-th, math.AP, math.MP, math.QA, nlin.CD, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We introduce a rotation invariant short distance cut-off in the theory of an
ideal fluid in three space dimensions, by requiring momenta to take values in a
sphere. This leads to an algebra of functions in position space is
non-commutative. Nevertheless it is possible to find appropriate analogues of
the Euler equations of an ideal fluid. The system still has a hamiltonian
structure. It is hoped that this will be useful in the study of possible
singularities in the evolution of Euler (or Navier-Stokes) equations in three
dimensions.

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.atm-clus, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The structural and electronic properties of the carbonyl sulfide dimer anion
are calculated using density functional theory within a pseudopotential method.
Three geometries are optimized and investigated: C2v and C2 symmetric, as well
as one asymmetric structure. A distribution of an excess charge in three
isomers are studied by the Hirshfeld method. In an asymmetric (OCS)2^- isomer
the charge is not equally divided between the two moieties, but it is
distributed as OCS^{-0.6} OCS^{-0.4}. Low-lying excitation levels of three
isomers are compared using the time-dependent density functional theory in the
Casida approach.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is conjectured that time intervals of any kind are proportional to the age
of the Universe taken at the time we are considering the interval. If this is
the case then the speed of light, in fact any speed, must decrease inversely
proportional to this age. The immediate consequence is that energy is not
conserved: the hypothesis that time is a homogeneous property implies
conservation of energy (the theorem of Noether). Nonconservation of energy
follows from the condition that any time interval is proportional to the
cosmological time, and therefore time can not be homogeneous. From the
uncertainty principle, taking the constant of Planck as a real constant, time
independent, it follows that any energy in the Universe decreases linearly with
time. We then prove that Schroedinger equation does not change, except for the
potential energy term. The future of the Universe gives for the wave functions
a long sinusoidal spatial solution, so that everything becomes unlocalized. The
relativistic absolute interval remains the same, even with a changing speed of
light, and the Universe turns out to be nonexpanding. A Mass-Boom effect is
confirmed.

Categories: physics.ao-ph
Abstract: This paper studies two high-pollution episodes over Greater Tokyo: 9 and 10
December 1999, and 31 July and 1 August 2001. Results obtained with the
chemistry-transport model (CTM) Polair3D are compared to measurements of
inorganic PM2.5. To understand to which extent the aerosol processes modeled in
Polair3D impact simulated inorganic PM2.5, Polair3D is run with different
options in the aerosol module, e.g. with/without heterogeneous reactions. To
quantify the impact of processes outside the aerosol module, simulations are
also done with another CTM (CMAQ). In the winter episode, sulfate is mostly
impacted by condensation, coagulation, long-range transport, and deposition to
a lesser extent. In the summer episode, the effect of long-range transport
largely dominates. The impact of condensation/evaporation is dominant for
ammonium, nitrate and chloride in both episodes. However, the impact of the
thermodynamic equilibrium assumption is limited. The impact of heterogeneous
reactions is large for nitrate and ammonium, and taking heterogeneous reactions
into account appears to be crucial in predicting the peaks of nitrate and
ammonium. The impact of deposition is the same for all inorganic PM2.5. It is
small compared to the impact of other processes although it is not negligible.
The impact of nucleation is negligible in the summer episode, and small in the
winter episode. The impact of coagulation is larger in the winter episode than
in the summer episode, because the number of small particles is higher in the
winter episode as a consequence of nucleation.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: A question that comes up repeatedly is how to combine the results of two
experiments if all that is known is that one experiment had a n-sigma effect
and another experiment had a m-sigma effect. This question is not well-posed:
depending on what additional assumptions are made, the preferred answer is
different. The note lists some of the more prominent papers on the topic, with
some brief comments and excerpts.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The results of a beam test performed at the KEK PS in June 2005 are
presented. Drift properties of an argon-isobutane mixture have been accurately
measured and compared with predictions at magnetic fields between 0 and 1
Tesla. The r.m.s. point resolution of a padrow is compared with simulation and
with an analytical calculation. The fundamental limitations due to detector
geometry and gas properties are reviewed and the measured performances of the
detector are found to be close to this limit. A numerical application to the
case of a Linear Collider TPC is presented.

Categories: gr-qc, hep-th, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: As per organizers' request, my talk at the 11th Marcel Grossmann Conference
consisted of two parts. In the first, I illustrated recent advances in loop
quantum gravity through examples. In the second, I presented an overall
assessment of the status of the program by addressing some frequently asked
questions. This account is addressed primarily to researchers outside the loop
quantum gravity community.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: A laser was designed and constructed with the goal of producing ultra-short
pulses at a high repetition rate as needed for certain applications of
multi-photon microscopy. With pure prism-based dispersion compensation
repetition rates of up to 270MHz were achieved. The laser operates with hard-
and soft-aperturing at the third (diverging output) and the first (parallel
output) stability limits, respectively. At the third stability limit we found a
pulse width of 27fs (FWHM) at 800nm central wavelength. At the first stability
limit pulse widths of 23-40fs with tunability from 780nm to 920nm were reached.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: This paper presents simulations of the trajectories of high-energy ions
through several bent crystal layers. At certain layer alignments volume
reflection occurs from each layer and the resultant multiple volume reflection
angle is correspondingly increased, along with the range of entrance angles
over which ions undergo volume reflection. Another feature is that the range of
entrance angles for which bent crystal channeling occurs is also increased in
passing through several bent layers. The use of several bent crystal layers to
produce multiple volume reflection provides an alternative approach to the
design of a space shield or radiation protection at accelerators based on bent
crystals.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Rigorous computer simulations of propagating electromagnetic fields have
become an important tool for optical metrology and optics design of
nanostructured components. As has been shown in previous benchmarks some of the
presently used methods suffer from low convergence rates and/or low accuracy of
the results and exhibit very long computation times which makes application to
extended 2D layout patterns impractical. We address 3D simulation tasks by
using a finite-element solver which has been shown to be superior to competing
methods by several orders of magnitude in accuracy and computational time for
typical microlithography simulations. We report on the current status of the
solver, incorporating higher order edge elements, adaptive refinement methods,
and fast solution algorithms. Further, we investigate the performance of the
solver in the 3D simulation project of light diffraction off an alternating
phase-shift contact-hole mask.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: Performance of wave-energy devices of the oscillating water column (OWC) type
is greatly enhanced when a resonant condition with the forcing waves is
maintained. The natural frequency of such systems can in general be tuned to
resonate with a given wave forcing frequency. In this paper we address the
tuning of an OWC sea-water pump to polychromatic waves. We report results of
wave tank experiments, which were conducted with a scale model of the pump.
Also, a numerical solution for the pump equations, which were proven in
previous work to successfully describe its behavior when driven by
monochromatic waves, is tested with various polychromatic wave spectra. Results
of the numerical model forced by the wave trains measured in the wave tank
experiments are used to develop a tuning criterion for the sea-water pump.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In the classical one-dimensional solution of fluid dynamics equations all
unknown functions depend only on time t and Cartesian coordinate x. Although
fluid spreads in all directions (velocity vector has three components) the
whole picture of motion is relatively simple: trajectory of one fluid particle
from plane x=const completely determines motion of the whole plane. Basing on
the symmetry analysis of differential equations we propose generalization of
this solution allowing movements in different directions of fluid particles
belonging to plane x=const. At that, all functions but an angle determining the
direction of particle's motion depend on t and x only, whereas the angle
depends on all coordinates. In this solution the whole picture of motion
superposes from identical trajectories placed under different angles in 3D
space. Orientations of the trajectories are restricted by a finite relation
possessing functional arbitrariness. The solution describes three-dimensional
nonlinear processes and singularities in infinitely conducting plasma, gas or
incompressible liquid.

Categories: cond-mat.mes-hall, physics.chem-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: The control of open quantum systems has a fundamental relevance for fields
ranging from quantum information processing to nanotechnology. Typically, the
system whose coherent dynamics one wants to manipulate, interacts with an
environment that smoothly degrades its quantum dynamics. Thus, a precise
understanding of the inner mechanisms of this process, called "decoherence", is
critical to develop strategies to control the quantum dynamics. In this thesis
we solved the generalized Liouville-von Neumann quantum master equation to
obtain the dynamics of many-spin systems interacting with a spin bath. We also
solve the spin dynamics within the Keldysh formalism. Both methods lead to
identical solutions and together gave us the possibility to obtain numerous
physical predictions that contrast well with Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
experiments. We applied these tools for molecular characterizations,
development of new numerical methodologies and the control of quantum dynamics
in experimental implementations. But, more important, these results contributed
to fundamental physical interpretations of how quantum dynamics behaves in open
systems. In particular, we found a manifestation of an environmentally induced
quantum dynamical phase transition.

Categories: physics.ins-det, nucl-ex
Abstract: A large acceptance scintillator detector with wavelength shifting optical
fibre readout has been designed and built to detect the decay particles of
$\eta$-nucleus bound system (the so-called $\eta$-mesic nuclei), namely,
protons and pions. The detector, named as ENSTAR detector, consists of 122
pieces of plastic scintillator of various shapes and sizes, which are arranged
in a cylindrical geometry to provide particle identification, energy loss and
coarse position information for these particles. A solid angle coverage of
$\sim$95% of total 4$\pi$ is obtained in the present design of the detector.
Monte Carlo phase space calculations performed to simulate the formation and
decay of $\eta$-mesic nuclei suggest that its decay particles, the protons and
pions are emitted with an opening angle of 150$^\circ \pm 20^\circ$, and with
energies in the range of 25 to 300 MeV and 225 to 450 MeV respectively. The
detailed GEANT simulations show that $\sim$ 80 % of the decay particles
(protons and pions) can be detected within ENSTAR. Several test measurements
using alpha source, cosmic-ray muons etc. have been carried out to study the
response of ENSTAR scintillator pieces. The in-beam tests of fully assembled
detector with proton beam of momentum 870 MeV/c from the Cooler synchrotron
COSY have been performed. The test results show that the scintillator fiber
design chosen for the detector has performed satisfactorily well. The present
article describes the detector design, simulation studies, construction details
and test results.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Optical microresonators have recently attracted a growing attention in the
photonics community. Their applications range from quantum electro-dynamics to
sensors and filtering devices for optical telecommunication systems, where they
are likely to become an essential building block. The integration of nonlinear
and electro-optical properties in the resonators represents a very stimulating
challenge, as it would incorporate new and more advanced functionality. Lithium
niobate is an excellent candidate material, being an established choice for
electro-optic and nonlinear optical applications. Here we report on the first
realization of optical microring resonators in submicrometric thin films of
lithium niobate. The high index contrast films are produced by an improved
crystal ion slicing and bonding technique using benzocyclobutene. The rings
have radius R=100 um and their transmission spectrum has been tuned using the
electro-optic effect. These results open new perspectives for the use of
lithium niobate in chip-scale integrated optical devices and nonlinear optical
microcavities.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We describe a technique for mapping the spatial variation of static electric,
static magnetic, and rf magnetic fields using a pulsed atomic or molecular
beam. The method is demonstrated using a beam designed to measure the electric
dipole moment of the electron. We present maps of the interaction region,
showing sensitivity to (i) electric field variation of 1.5 V/cm at 3.3 kV/cm
with a spatial resolution of 15 mm; (ii) magnetic field variation of 5 nT with
25 mm resolution; (iii) radio-frequency magnetic field amplitude with 15 mm
resolution. This new diagnostic technique is very powerful in the context of
high-precision atomic and molecular physics experiments, where pulsed beams
have not hitherto found widespread application.

Categories: cond-mat.str-el, cond-mat.mes-hall, nlin.PS, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The vortex density of a rotating superfluid, divided by its particle mass,
dictates the superfluid's angular velocity through the Feynman relation. To
find how the Feynman relation applies to superfluid mixtures, we investigate a
rotating two-component Bose-Einstein condensate, composed of bosons with
different masses. We find that in the case of sufficiently strong interspecies
attraction, the vortex lattices of the two condensates lock and rotate at the
drive frequency, while the superfluids themselves rotate at two different
velocities, whose ratio is the ratio between the particle mass of the two
species. In this paper, we characterize the vortex-locked state, establish its
regime of stability, and find that it surives within a disk smaller than a
critical radius, beyond which vortices become unbound, and the two Bose-gas
rings rotate together at the frequency of the external drive.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: When modeling the distribution of a set of data by a mixture of Gaussians,
there are two possibilities: i) the classical one is using a set of parameters
which are the proportions, the means and the variances; ii) the second is to
consider the proportions as the probabilities of a discrete valued hidden
variable. In the first case a usual prior distribution for the proportions is
the Dirichlet which accounts for the fact that they have to sum up to one. In
the second case, to each data is associated a hidden variable for which we
consider two possibilities: a) assuming those variables to be i.i.d. We show
then that this scheme is equivalent to the classical mixture model with
Dirichlet prior; b) assuming a Markovian structure. Then we choose the simplest
markovian model which is the Potts distribution. As we will see this model is
more appropriate for the case where the data represents the pixels of an image
for which the hidden variables represent a segmentation of that image. The main
object of this paper is to give some details on these models and different
algorithms used for their simulation and the estimation of their parameters.
  Key Words: Mixture of Gaussians, Dirichlet, Potts, Classification,
Segmentation.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: Utilizing an eigenfunction decomposition, we study the growth and spectra of
energy in the vortical and wave modes of a 3D rotating stratified fluid as a
function of $\epsilon = f/N$. Working in regimes characterized by moderate
Burger numbers, i.e. $Bu = 1/\epsilon^2 < 1$ or $Bu \ge 1$, our results
indicate profound change in the character of vortical and wave mode
interactions with respect to $Bu = 1$. As with the reference state of
$\epsilon=1$, for $\epsilon < 1$ the wave mode energy saturates quite quickly
and the ensuing forward cascade continues to act as an efficient means of
dissipating ageostrophic energy. Further, these saturated spectra steepen as
$\epsilon$ decreases: we see a shift from $k^{-1}$ to $k^{-5/3}$ scaling for
$k_f < k < k_d$ (where $k_f$ and $k_d$ are the forcing and dissipation scales,
respectively). On the other hand, when $\epsilon > 1$ the wave mode energy
never saturates and comes to dominate the total energy in the system. In fact,
in a sense the wave modes behave in an asymmetric manner about $\epsilon = 1$.
With regard to the vortical modes, for $\epsilon \le 1$, the signatures of 3D
quasigeostrophy are clearly evident. Specifically, we see a $k^{-3}$ scaling
for $k_f < k < k_d$ and, in accord with an inverse transfer of energy, the
vortical mode energy never saturates but rather increases for all $k < k_f$. In
contrast, for $\epsilon > 1$ and increasing, the vortical modes contain a
progressively smaller fraction of the total energy indicating that the 3D
quasigeostrophic subsystem plays an energetically smaller role in the overall
dynamics.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: Modeling non Gaussian and non stationary signals and images has always been
one of the most important part of signal and image processing methods. In this
paper, first we propose a few new models, all based on using hidden variables
for modeling either stationary but non Gaussian or Gaussian but non stationary
or non Gaussian and non stationary signals and images. Then, we will see how to
use these models in independent component analysis (ICA) or blind source
separation (BSS). The computational aspects of the Bayesian estimation
framework associated with these prior models are also discussed.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We study the hierarchical structuring of islands of stable periodic
oscillations inside chaotic regions in phase diagrams of single-mode
semiconductor lasers with optical injection. Phase diagrams display remarkable
{\it accumulation horizons}: boundaries formed by the accumulation of infinite
cascades of self-similar islands of periodic solutions of ever-increasing
period. Each cascade follows a specific period-adding route. The riddling of
chaotic laser phases by such networks of periodic solutions may compromise
applications operating with chaotic signals such as e.g. secure communications.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: Hyperspectral images can be represented either as a set of images or as a set
of spectra. Spectral classification and segmentation and data reduction are the
main problems in hyperspectral image analysis. In this paper we propose a
Bayesian estimation approach with an appropriate hiearchical model with hidden
markovian variables which gives the possibility to jointly do data reduction,
spectral classification and image segmentation. In the proposed model, the
desired independent components are piecewise homogeneous images which share the
same common hidden segmentation variable. Thus, the joint Bayesian estimation
of this hidden variable as well as the sources and the mixing matrix of the
source separation problem gives a solution for all the three problems of
dimensionality reduction, spectra classification and segmentation of
hyperspectral images. A few simulation results illustrate the performances of
the proposed method compared to other classical methods usually used in
hyperspectral image processing.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: this paper we consider the problem of separating noisy instantaneous linear
mixtures of document images in the Bayesian framework. The source image is
modeled hierarchically by a latent labeling process representing the common
classifications of document objects among different color channels and the
intensity process of pixels given the class labels. A Potts Markov random field
is used to model regional regularity of the classification labels inside object
regions. Local dependency between neighboring pixels can also be accounted by
smoothness constraint on their intensities. Within the Bayesian approach, all
unknowns including the source, the classification, the mixing coefficients and
the distribution parameters of these variables are estimated from their
posterior laws. The corresponding Bayesian computations are done by MCMC
sampling algorithm. Results from experiments on synthetic and real image
mixtures are presented to illustrate the performance of the proposed method.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We report laser emission from single, stationary, Rhodamine B-doped
glycerol/water microdroplets located on a superhydrophobic surface. In the
experiments, a pulsed, frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser operating at 532 nm was
used as the excitation source. The microdroplets ranged in diameter from a few
to 20 um. Lasing was achieved in the red-shifted portion of the dye emission
spectrum with threshold fluences as low as 750 J/cm2. Photobleaching was
observed when the microdroplets were pumped above threshold. In certain cases,
multimode lasing was also observed and attributed to the simultaneous lasing of
two modes belonging to different sets of whispering gallery modes.

Categories: nlin.CD, physics.med-ph
Abstract: A diagnostics method based on a continuous wavelet transform is proposed.
This method makes it possible to diagnose the presence of synchronization of
the oscillations of a self-excited oscillator locked by an external force with
a linearly modulated frequency and to distinguish such a situation from the
case when an external signal leaks into self-oscillations; i.e., the signals
are summed without a change in the self-oscillation frequency. The method's
efficiency is shown with the use of a Van der Pol generator and experimental
physiological data as examples.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, math-ph, math.MP
Abstract: An elegant quaternionic formulation is given for the Lagrangian advection
equation for velocity vector potential in fluid dynamics. At first we study the
topological significance of a restricted conserved quantity viz.,
stream-helicity and later more realistic configuration of open streamlines is
figured out. Also, using Clebsch parameterisation of the velocity vector
potential yet another physical significance for the stream-helicity is
provided. Finally we give a Nambu-Poisson formalism of the Lagrangian advection
equation for velocity vector potential.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Technological innovation has extensively been studied to make firms
sustainable and more competitive. Within this context, the most important
recent issue has been the dynamics of collaborative innovation among firms. We
therefore investigated a patent network, especially focusing on its spatial
characteristics. The results can be summarized as follows. (1) The degree
distribution in a patent network follows a power law. A firm can then be
connected to many firms via hubs connected to the firm. (2) The neighbors'
average degree has a null correlation, but the clustering coefficient has a
negative correlation. The latter means that there is a hierarchical structure
and bridging different modules may shorten the paths between the nodes in them.
(3) The distance of links not only indicates the regional accumulations of
firms, but the importance of time it takes to travel, which plays a key role in
creating links. (4) The ratio of internal links in cities indicates that we
have to consider the existing links firms have to facilitate the creation of
new links.

Categories: q-bio.BM, cond-mat.soft, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Analyzing nonlinear conformational relaxation dynamics in elastic networks
corresponding to two classical motor proteins, we find that they respond by
well-defined internal mechanical motions to various initial deformations and
that these motions are robust against external perturbations. We show that this
behavior is not characteristic for random elastic networks. However, special
network architectures with such properties can be designed by evolutionary
optimization methods. Using them, an example of an artificial elastic network,
operating as a cyclic machine powered by ligand binding, is constructed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present a nonrelativistic theory for the quantum mechanical description of
longitudinal atomic beam spin echo experiments, where a beam of neutral atoms
is subjected to static electric and magnetic fields. The atomic wave function
is the solution of a matrix-valued Schroedinger equation and can be written as
superposition of local (atomic) eigenstates of the potential matrix. The
position- and time-dependent amplitude function of each eigenstate represents
an atomic wave packet and can be calculated in a series expansion with a master
formula that we derive. The zeroth order of this series expansion describes the
adiabatic limit, whereas the higher order contributions contain the mixing of
the eigenstates and the corresponding amplitude functions.
  We give a tutorial for the theoretical description of longitudinal atomic
beam spin echo experiments and for the so-called Fahrplan model, which is a
visualisation tool for the propagation of wave packets of different atomic
eigenstates.
  As an example for the application of our theory, we study parity violating
geometric (Berry-)phases. In this context, we define geometric flux densities,
which for certain field configurations can be used to illustrate geometric
phases in a vector diagram. Considering an example with a specific field
configuration, we prove the existence of a parity violating geometric phase.

Categories: physics.ao-ph
Abstract: This study present a comparison of lidar observations of midlatitude cirrus
clouds over the SIRTA observatory between 2002 and 2006 with multiple
tropopauses (MT) retrieved from radiosounding temperature profiles. The
temporal variability of MT properties (frequency, thickness) are discussed.
Results show a marked annual cycle, with MT frequency reaching its lowest point
in May (~18% occurrence of MT) and slowly rising to more than 40% in DJF. The
average thickness of the MT also follows an annual cycle, going from less than
1 km in spring to 1.5 km in late autumn. Comparison with lidar observations
show that cirrus clouds show a preference for being located close below the 1st
tropopause. When the cloud top is above the 1st tropopause (7% of
observations), in 20% of cases the cloud base is above it as well, resulting in
a cirrus cloud "sandwiched" between the two tropopauses. Compared to the
general distribution of cirrus, cross-tropopause cirrus show a higher frequency
of large optical depths, while inter-tropopause cirrus show almost exclusively
low optical depths (Tau < 0.03 in 90% of cases) typical of subvisible clouds.
Results suggest the occurrence of inter-tropopause cirrus clouds is correlated
with the frequency of multiple tropopauses.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: The paper explores the use of nanoparticles of gamma Fe2O3 for hyperthermia
treatment of living organisms by absorption of 1064 nm radiations from Nd:YAG
laser. Escherichia coli cells have been used as the model system for
demonstrating the effect wherein lysine is used as an interface between the
cell walls and the nanoparticles. Scanning Electron Microscopic observations
have, exclusively, proved that attachment of nanoparticles of iron oxide along
with lysine alone is responsible for absorption of above radiations. The
quantitative estimation has been provided by growth rate measurements and
protein assessment of the cells. The nanoparticles of gamma Fe2O3 were
synthesized by DC arc plasma assisted gas phase condensation.

Categories: hep-th, gr-qc, physics.acc-ph
Abstract: We present simple arguments that detectors moving with constant acceleration
(even acceleration for a finite time) should detect particles. The effect is
seen to be universal. Moreover, detectors undergoing linear acceleration and
uniform, circular motion both detect particles for the same physical reason. We
show that if one uses a circularly orbiting electron in a constant external
magnetic field as the Unruh--DeWitt detector, then the Unruh effect physically
coincides with the experimentally verified Sokolov--Ternov effect.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Surface optical plasmons on metal-dielectric boundaries of various shapes are
studied. The study features by the exploration of plasmons of the frequency
that is larger than $\omega_{pl}/\sqrt{2}$ and approximately equal to $\omega
_{pl}$. These plasmons exist on thin films, thin cylinders, and on spheres.
Such a plasmon does not exist on a single surface. For applications the use of
plasmons of the ~$\omega_{pl}$ frequency means the promotion of nanophotonics
devices into a short wavelength range. For Ag this means the promotion to the
wavelength of 140 nm.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Many systems of different nature exhibit scale free behaviors. Economic
systems with power law distribution in the wealth is one of the examples. To
better understand the working behind the complexity, we undertook an empirical
study measuring the interactions between market participants. A Web server was
setup to administer the exchange of futures contracts whose liquidation prices
were coupled to event outcomes. After free registration, participants started
trading to compete for the money prizes upon maturity of the futures contracts
at the end of the experiment. The evolving `cash' flow network was
reconstructed from the transactions between players. We show that the network
topology is hierarchical, disassortative and scale-free with a power law
exponent of 1.02+-0.09 in the degree distribution. The small-world property
emerged early in the experiment while the number of participants was still
small. We also show power law distributions of the net incomes and
inter-transaction time intervals. Big winners and losers are associated with
high degree, high betweenness centrality, low clustering coefficient and low
degree-correlation. We identify communities in the network as groups of the
like-minded. The distribution of the community sizes is shown to be power-law
distributed with an exponent of 1.19+-0.16.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This paper has been withdrawn by the author.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We address the role of community structure of an interaction network in
ordering dynamics, as well as associated forms of metastability. We consider
the voter and AB model dynamics in a network model which mimics social
interactions. The AB model includes an intermediate state between the two
excluding options of the voter model. For the voter model we find dynamical
metastable disordered states with a characteristic mean lifetime. However, for
the AB dynamics we find a power law distribution of the lifetime of metastable
states, so that the mean lifetime is not representative of the dynamics. These
trapped metastable states, which can order at all time scales, originate in the
mesoscopic network structure.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The purpose of this article is to show that the introduction of hidden
variables to describe individual events is fully consistent with the
statistical predictions of quantum theory. We illustrate the validity of this
assertion by discussing two fundamental experiments on correlated photons which
are believed to behave ``violently non-classical''. Our considerations carry
over to correlated pairs of neutral particles of spin one-half in a singlet
state. Much in the spirit of Einstein's conviction we come to the conclusion
that the state vector of a system does not provide an exhaustive description of
the individual physical system. We also briefly discuss an experiment on
``quantum teleportation'' and demonstrate that our completely local approach
leads to a full understanding of the experiment indicating the absence of any
teleportation phenomenon. We caution that the indiscriminated use of the term
``Quantum Theory'' tends to obscure distinct differences between the quantum
mechanics of massive particles and the propagation of photons. It is emphasized
that the properties of polarizers, beam splitters, halfwave plates etc. used in
photon-correlation experiments are defined by the laws of classical optics.
Hence, understanding the outcome of those experiments requires a well-founded
interconnection between classical and quantum electrodynamics free from
unnecessary hypotheses.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The Ten dimensional Unified field theory has a 4 dimensional Riemannian
spacetime and six dimensional Calabi Yau space structure. The supersymmetric
Yang Mills fields and black holes are solutions in these theories. The
formation of primordial black holes in early universe, the collapse to
singularity of stellar black holes, the Hawking evaporation of microscopic
black holes in LHC are topics of observational and theoretical interest.
  The observation of gamma ray bursts and creation of spectrum of particles and
radiation of dark and normal matter occur due to primordial and microscopic
black holes. The approach to singularity in black hole interior solutions,
require the Bogoliubov transforms of SUSY YM fields in black hole geometries;
both during formation and in evaporation. The Hawking effect of radiating black
holes is applicable for all the fields. Invariants can be defined to give the
conditions for these processes.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The gravitational phenomenon, founded on the assumption of absorption of a
flux of gravitons through the matter, led to a law of attraction comprising a
term of attenuation of gravity. The attenuation effect, which depends on the
distribution of mass elements into the Sun, was compared with the relativistic
effect for the orbital elements of planets. The calculations carried out with
our modified law of Newton, lead to a perfect agreement for the advance of the
perihelion of planets, and give an interaction cross section with the matter of
3.2x10^-17 m2/kg (approximately 10^-40 cm2/nucleon). The effect of attenuation
during a solar eclipse will produce a local reduction in the soli-lunar
attraction of 0.13 microgal. This small variation of gravity during the eclipse
can lead to distortions of the geoid of about ten millimetres of which effect
on gravity, estimated at a few microgals, is compatible with the observed
gravitational anomalies. The gravimetric measurements taken in the area of
Montreal during the Sun eclipse of May 10, 1994, show the existence of an
anomaly of 2.4 microgals that coincides perfectly with the period of the
eclipse.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In a static gravitational field an intersection of a worldline by a global
hypersurface of simultaneity t=const gives an invariant constraint relating the
proper time of this event by t. Since at any finite t the such constrained
proper time intervals are less than reqiured for crossing a horizon, general
relativity predicts the gravitational freezing of proper times in stars with
time-like or null geodesics everywhere. The time dilation stabilizes
contracting massive stars by freezing, which is maximal but finite at the
centre, and the surface is frozen near the gravitational radius. The frozen
stars (frozars) slowly defrost due to emissions and external interactions, the
internal phase transitions can initiate refreezing with bursts and explosions.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Interest in development of brain prostheses, which might be proposed to
recover mental functions lost due to neuron-degenerative disease or trauma,
requires new methods in molecular engineering and nanotechnology to build
artificial brain tissues. We develop a Dynamic Core model to analyze complexity
of damaged biological neural network as well as transition and recovery of the
system functionality due to changes in the system environment. We provide a
method to model complexity of physical systems which might be proposed as an
artificial tissue or prosthesis. Delocalization of Dynamic Core model is
developed to analyze migration of mental functions in dynamic bio-systems which
undergo architecture transition induced by trauma. Term Dynamic Core is used to
define a set of causally related functions and Delocalization is used to
describe the process of migration. Information geometry and topological
formalisms are proposed to analyze information processes. A holographic model
is proposed to construct dynamic environment with self-poetic Dynamic Core
which preserve functional properties under transition from one host to another.
We found statistical constraints for complex systems which conserve a Dynamic
Core under environment transition. Also we suggest those constraints might
provide recommendations for nanotechnologies and tissue engineering used in
development of an artificial brain tissue.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: A self-control mechanism that stabilizes the size of Rhodamine B-doped water
microdroplets standing on a superhydrophobic surface is demonstrated. The
mechanism relies on the interplay between the condensation rate that was kept
constant and evaporation rate induced by laser excitation which critically
depends on the size of the microdroplets. The radii of individual water
microdroplets (>5 um) stayed within a few nanometers during long time periods
(up to 455 seconds). By blocking the laser excitation for 500 msec, the stable
volume of individual microdroplets was shown to change stepwise.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, astro-ph
Abstract: In this work linear stability analysis of a four-fluid optically thin plasma
consisting of electrons, ions, neutral atoms, and charged dust particles is
performed with respect to the radiation-condensation (RC) instability. The
energy budget of the plasma involves the input from heating through
photo-electron emission by dust particles under external ultraviolet radiation
as well as radiative losses in inelastic electron-neutral, electron-ion,
neutral-neutral collisions. It is shown that negatively charged particles
stimulate the RC instability in the sense that the conditions for the
instability to hold are wider than similar conditions in a single-fluid
description.

Categories: q-bio.QM, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.data-an
Abstract: Motivation: Similarity-measure based clustering is a crucial problem
appearing throughout scientific data analysis. Recently, a powerful new
algorithm called Affinity Propagation (AP) based on message-passing techniques
was proposed by Frey and Dueck \cite{Frey07}. In AP, each cluster is identified
by a common exemplar all other data points of the same cluster refer to, and
exemplars have to refer to themselves. Albeit its proved power, AP in its
present form suffers from a number of drawbacks. The hard constraint of having
exactly one exemplar per cluster restricts AP to classes of regularly shaped
clusters, and leads to suboptimal performance, {\it e.g.}, in analyzing gene
expression data. Results: This limitation can be overcome by relaxing the AP
hard constraints. A new parameter controls the importance of the constraints
compared to the aim of maximizing the overall similarity, and allows to
interpolate between the simple case where each data point selects its closest
neighbor as an exemplar and the original AP. The resulting soft-constraint
affinity propagation (SCAP) becomes more informative, accurate and leads to
more stable clustering. Even though a new {\it a priori} free-parameter is
introduced, the overall dependence of the algorithm on external tuning is
reduced, as robustness is increased and an optimal strategy for parameter
selection emerges more naturally. SCAP is tested on biological benchmark data,
including in particular microarray data related to various cancer types. We
show that the algorithm efficiently unveils the hierarchical cluster structure
present in the data sets. Further on, it allows to extract sparse gene
expression signatures for each cluster.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We propose a scheme to generate temporal vector optical solitons in a
lifetime broadened five-state atomic medium via electromagnetically induced
transparency. We show that this scheme, which is fundamentally different from
the passive one by using optical fibers, is capable of achieving
distortion-free vector optical solitons with ultraslow propagating velocity
under very weak drive conditions. We demonstrate both analytically and
numerically that it is easy to realize Manakov temporal vector solitons by
actively manipulating the dispersion and self- and cross-phase modulation
effects of the system.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We discuss the concept of energy packets in respect to the energy transported
by electromagnetic waves and we demonstrate that this physical quantity can be
used in physical problems involving relativistic effects. This refined concept
provides results compatible to those obtained by simpler definition of energy
density when relativistic effects apply to the free electromagnetic waves. We
found this concept further compatible to quantum theory perceptions and we show
how it could be used to conciliate between different physical approaches
including the classical electromagnetic wave theory, the special relativity and
the quantum theories.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: Time-of-flight (TOF) cameras are based on a new technology that delivers
distance maps by the use of a modulated light source. In this paper we first
describe a set of experiments that we performed with TOF cameras. We then
propose a noise model which is able to explain some of the phenomena observed
in the experiments. The model is based on assuming a noise source that is
correlated with the light source (shot noise) and an additional additive noise
source (dark current noise). The model predicts well the dependency of the
distance errors on the image intensity and the true distance at an individual
pixel.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: English: This paper concerns the image reconstruction from a few projections
in Computed Tomography (CT). The main objective of this paper is to show that
the problem is so ill posed that no classical method, such as analytical
methods based on inverse Radon transform, nor the algebraic methods such as
Least squares (LS) or regularization theory can give satisfactory result. As an
example, we consider in detail the case of image reconstruction from two
horizontal and vertical projections. We then show how a particular composite
Markov modeling and the Bayesian estimation framework can possibly propose
satisfactory solutions to the problem. For demonstration and educational
purpose a set of Matlab programs are given for a live presentation of the
results.
  -----
  French: Ce travail, \`a but p\'edagogique, pr\'esente le probl\`eme inverse
de la reconstruction d'image en tomographie X lorsque le nombre des projections
est tr\`es limit\'e. voir le texte en Anglais et en Fran\c{c}ais.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, math-ph, math.MP, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: A theory of chiral lipid membranes is proposed on the basis of a concise free
energy density which includes the contributions of the bending and the surface
tension of membranes, as well as the chirality and orientational variation of
tilting molecules. This theory is consistent with the previous experiments
[J.M. Schnur \textit{et al.}, Science \textbf{264}, 945 (1994); M.S. Spector
\textit{et al.}, Langmuir \textbf{14}, 3493 (1998); Y. Zhao, \textit{et al.},
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA \textbf{102}, 7438 (2005)] on self-assembled chiral
lipid membranes of DC$_{8,9}$PC. A torus with the ratio between its two
generated radii larger than $\sqrt{2}$ is predicted from the Euler-Lagrange
equations. It is found that tubules with helically modulated tilting state are
not admitted by the Euler-Lagrange equations, and that they are less
energetically favorable than helical ripples in tubules. The pitch angles of
helical ripples are theoretically estimated to be about 0$^\circ$ and
35$^\circ$, which are close to the most frequent values 5$^\circ$ and
28$^\circ$ observed in the experiment [N. Mahajan \textit{et al.}, Langmuir
\textbf{22}, 1973 (2006)]. Additionally, the present theory can explain twisted
ribbons of achiral cationic amphiphiles interacting with chiral tartrate
counterions. The ratio between the width and pitch of twisted ribbons is
predicted to be proportional to the relative concentration difference of left-
and right-handed enantiomers in the low relative concentration difference
region, which is in good agreement with the experiment [R. Oda \textit{et al.},
Nature (London) \textbf{399}, 566 (1999)].

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In this paper, first a great number of inverse problems which arise in
instrumentation, in computer imaging systems and in computer vision are
presented. Then a common general forward modeling for them is given and the
corresponding inversion problem is presented. Then, after showing the
inadequacy of the classical analytical and least square methods for these ill
posed inverse problems, a Bayesian estimation framework is presented which can
handle, in a coherent way, all these problems. One of the main steps, in
Bayesian inversion framework is the prior modeling of the unknowns. For this
reason, a great number of such models and in particular the compound hidden
Markov models are presented. Then, the main computational tools of the Bayesian
estimation are briefly presented. Finally, some particular cases are studied in
detail and new results are presented.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Forest-fire waiting times, defined as the time between successive events
above a certain size in a given region, are calculated for Italy. The
probability densities of the waiting times are found to verify a scaling law,
despite that fact that the distribution of fire sizes is not a power law. The
meaning of such behavior in terms of the possible self-similarity of the
process in a nonstationary system is discussed. We find that the scaling law
arises as a consequence of the stationarity of fire sizes and the existence of
a non-trivial ``instantaneous'' scaling law, sustained by the correlations of
the process.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech
Abstract: Analyzing football score data with statistical techniques, we investigate how
the highly co-operative nature of the game is reflected in averaged properties
such as the distributions of scored goals for the home and away teams. It turns
out that in particular the tails of the distributions are not well described by
independent Bernoulli trials, but rather well modeled by negative binomial or
generalized extreme value distributions. To understand this behavior from first
principles, we suggest to modify the Bernoulli random process to include a
simple component of self-affirmation which seems to describe the data
surprisingly well and allows to interpret the observed deviation from Gaussian
statistics. The phenomenological distributions used before can be understood as
special cases within this framework. We analyzed historical football score data
from many leagues in Europe as well as from international tournaments and found
the proposed models to be applicable rather universally. In particular, here we
compare men's and women's leagues and the separate German leagues during the
cold war times and find some remarkable differences.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: The acoustic response of a rigid frame porous slab with a periodic set of
inclusions is calculated by use of a multipole method. The acoustic properties,
in particular the absorption, of such a structure are then derived and studied.
Numerical results together with a modal analysis show that the addition of a
periodic set of high-contrast inclusions leads to quasi-modes excitation of
both the slab and the gratings, and to a large increase of the acoustic
absorption of the initial slab, this being partly due to the quasi-modes
excitation.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The photon box thought experiment can be considered a forerunner of the
EPR-experiment: by performing suitable measurements on the box it is possible
to ``prepare'' the photon, long after it has escaped, in either of two
complementary states. Consistency requires that the corresponding box
measurements be complementary as well. At first sight it seems, however, that
these measurements can be jointly performed with arbitrary precision: they
pertain to different systems (the center of mass of the box and an internal
clock, respectively). But this is deceptive. As we show by explicit
calculation, although the relevant quantities are simultaneously measurable,
they develop non-vanishing commutators when calculated back to the time of
escape of the photon. This justifies Bohr's qualitative arguments in a precise
way; and it illustrates how the details of the dynamics conspire to guarantee
the requirements of complementarity. In addition, our calculations exhibit a
``fine structure'' in the distribution of the uncertainties over the
complementary quantities: depending on \textit{when} the box measurement is
performed, the resulting quantum description of the photon differs. This brings
us close to the argumentation of the later EPR thought experiment.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We present a new class of exact nonsingular solutions for the Maxwell
equations in vacuum, which describe the electromagnetic field of the
counterpropagating focused laser beams and the subperiod focused laser pulse.
These solutions are derived by the use of a modification of the "complex source
method", investigated and visualized.

Categories: hep-th, gr-qc, hep-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Several general arguments indicate that the event horizon behaves as a
stretched membrane. We propose using this relation to understand gravity and
dynamics of black objects in higher dimensions. We provide evidence that (i)
the gravitational Gregory-Laflamme instability has a classical counterpart in
the Rayleigh-Plateau instability of fluids. Each known feature of the
gravitational instability can be accounted for in the fluid model. These
features include threshold mode, dispersion relation, time evolution and
critical dimension of certain phase transitions. Thus, we argue that black
strings break in much the same way as water from a faucet breaks up into small
droplets. (ii) General rotating black holes can also be understood with this
analogy. In particular, instability and bifurcation diagrams for black objects
can easily be inferred. This correspondence can and should be used as a guiding
tool to understand and explore physics of gravity in higher dimensions.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: This paper investigates the sound production in a system made of a bore
coupled with a reed valve. Extending previous work (Debut, 2004), the input
impedance of the bore is projected on the modes of the air column. The acoustic
pressure is therefore calculated as the sum of modal components. The
airr&#114;&#64258;ow blown into the bore is modulated by reed motion, assuming
the reed to be a single degree of freedom oscillator. Calculation of
self-sustained oscillations controlled by time-varying mouth pressure and
player's embouchure parameter is performed using ODE solvers. Results emphasize
the par ticipation of the whole set of components in the mode locking process.
Another impor tant feature is the mutual inn&#110;&#64258;uence of reed and
bore resonance during growing blowing pressure transients, oscillation
threshold being altered by the reed natural frequency and the reed damping.
Steady-state oscillations are also investigated and compared with results given
by harmonic balance method and by digital sound synthesis.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In this letter, a theoretical method for the analysis of diffusive
flux/current to limited scale self-affine random fractals is presented and
compared with experimentally measured electrochemical current for such
roughness. The theory explains the several experimental findings of the
temporal scale invariance as well as deviation from this of current transients
in terms of three dominant fractal parameters for the limited-length scales of
roughness. This theoretical method is based on limited scale power-law
characterization of the interfacial roughness spectrum and the solution of
diffusion equation under the diffusion-limited boundary conditions on rough
interfaces. More broadly, these calculations challenges the earlier belief that
the anomalous behavior is solely dependent on fractal dimension of roughness
and highlight the potential to apply this equation for the scale invariant
roughness determination. Finally, the validity of theoretical result is tested
with extensive experimental data.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: A three-dimensional nonlinear dynamo process is identified in rotating plane
Couette flow in the Keplerian regime. It is analogous to the hydrodynamic
self-sustaining process in non-rotating shear flows and relies on the
magneto-rotational instability of a toroidal magnetic field. Steady nonlinear
solutions are computed numerically for a wide range of magnetic Reynolds
numbers but are restricted to low Reynolds numbers. This process may be
important to explain the sustenance of coherent fields and turbulent motions in
Keplerian accretion disks, where all its basic ingredients are present.

Categories: q-fin.TR, physics.pop-ph, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The author proposes a finance trading strategy named Entropy Oriented Trading
and apply thermodynamics on the strategy. The state variables are chosen so
that the strategy satisfies the second law of thermodynamics. Using the law,
the author proves that the rate of investment (ROI) of the strategy is equal to
or more than the rate of price change.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, cond-mat.str-el, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Bond stretching mimics different levels of electron correlation and provides
a challenging testbed for approximate many-body computational methods. Using
the recently developed phaseless auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo (AF QMC)
method, we examine bond stretching in the well-studied molecules BH and N$_2$,
and in the H$_{50}$ chain. To control the sign/phase problem, the phaseless AF
QMC method constrains the paths in the auxiliary-field path integrals with an
approximate phase condition that depends on a trial wave function. With single
Slater determinants from unrestricted Hartree-Fock (UHF) as trial wave
function, the phaseless AF QMC method generally gives better overall accuracy
and a more uniform behavior than the coupled cluster CCSD(T) method in mapping
the potential-energy curve. In both BH and N$_2$, we also study the use of
multiple-determinant trial wave functions from multi-configuration
self-consistent-field (MCSCF) calculations. The increase in computational cost
versus the gain in statistical and systematic accuracy are examined. With such
trial wave functions, excellent results are obtained across the entire region
between equilibrium and the dissociation limit.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.comp-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: By performing two parallel numerical experiments -- solving the dynamical
Hamiltonian equations and solving the Hasselmann kinetic equation -- we
examined the applicability of the theory of weak turbulence to the description
of the time evolution of an ensemble of free surface waves (a swell) on deep
water. We observed qualitative coincidence of the results.
  To achieve quantitative coincidence, we augmented the kinetic equation by an
empirical dissipation term modelling the strongly nonlinear process of
white-capping. Fitting the two experiments, we determined the dissipation
function due to wave breaking and found that it depends very sharply on the
parameter of nonlinearity (the surface steepness). The onset of white-capping
can be compared to a second-order phase transition. This result corroborates
with experimental observations by Banner, Babanin, Young.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The three-dimensional instability of two coupled electromagnetic waves in an
unmagnetized plasma is investigated theoretically and numerically. In the
regime of two-plasmon decay, where one pump wave frequency is approximately
twice the electron plasma frequency, we find that the coupled pump waves give
rise to enhanced instability with wave vectors between those of the two beams.
In the case of ion parametric decay instability, where the pump wave decays
into one Langmuir wave and one ion acoustic wave, the instability regions are
added with no distinct amplification. Our investigation can be useful in
interpreting laser-plasma as well as ionospheric heating experiments.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: We derive steady equilibria for lateral downslope moisture flow in an
idealized thin closed layer as a solution to the 1D Richards' Equation. The
equilibria are determined by two free parameters: the downslope flux and a
boundary condition. Solutions exhibit a constant downslope flow speed and
moisture content for the constant equilibrium flux, which is the product of the
two. However where an isolated zone of fixed saturation degree exists
representing a boundary condition, the flow speed immediately upslope is
reduced and the moisture content correspondingly increased to preserve the
constant equilibrium flux. The capillary head jump at the saturated zone
produces a blockage that gives a high moisture content back upslope through a
pooling distance determined by the equilibrium condition that the downslope
flux is constant. In our numerical integrations, the vertically projected
pooling height is more than 10 km for a fully saturated zone in mixed silty or
clay soils, but decreases by about an order of magnitude with every 10%
decrease in the boundary-zone saturation degree. The drying of downhill
saturated zones with the increased speed of mountain moisture outflow and
corresponding decreased mountain moisture content gives a viable explanation
for the mysterious ~69% unaccounted drop seen in the spring outflow in the La
Luz / Fresnal Watershed at Alamogordo's upstream spring-box diversions in the
semiarid southeastern New Mexico USA.

Categories: cond-mat.supr-con, physics.ins-det
Abstract: We discuss theoretically the properties of an electromechanical oscillator
whose operation is based upon the cyclic, quasi-conservative conversion between
gravitational potential, kinetic, and magnetic energies. The system consists of
a strong-pinning type-II superconductor square loop subjected to a constant
external force and to magnetic fields. The loop oscillates in the upright
position at a frequency that can be tuned in the range 10-1000 Hz, and has
induced in it a rectified electrical current. The emphasis of this paper is on
the evaluation of the major remaining source of losses in the oscillations. We
argue that such losses should be associated with the viscous vibration of
pinned flux lines in the superconductor Nb-Ti wire, provided the oscillator is
kept close to zero Kelvin, under high-vacuum, and the magnetic field is
sufficiently uniform. We discuss how other different sources of loss would
become negligible for such operational conditions, so that a very high quality
factor Q exceeding 10^(10) might in principle be reached by the oscillator. The
prospective utilization of such oscillator as a low-frequency high-Q clock is
analyzed.Since publication the ideas in this paper have been explored both by
the author and elsewhere, in applications covering Metrology, quantum systems,
and gravimetry.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: NASA has claimed the discovery of a `Ring of Dark Matter' in the galaxy
cluster CL 0024+17, see Jee M.J. et al. arXiv:0705.2171, based upon
gravitational lensing data. Here we show that the lensing can be given an
alternative explanation that does not involve `dark matter'. This explanation
comes from the new dynamics of 3-space. This dynamics involves two constant G
and alpha - the fine structure constant. This dynamics has explained the bore
hole anomaly, spiral galaxy flat rotation speeds, the masses of black holes in
spherical galaxies, gravitational light bending and lensing, all without
invoking `dark matter', and also the supernova redshift data without the need
for `dark energy'.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We have presented first an axiomatic derivation of Boltzmann entropy on the
basis of two axioms consistent with two basic properties of thermodynamic
entropy. We have then studied the relationship between Boltzmann entropy and
information along with its physical significance.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper, it is shown that the cosmological model that was introduced in
a sequence of three earlier papers under the title, A Dust Universe Solution to
the Dark Energy Problem can be used to analyse and solve the Cosmological
Coincidence Problem. The generic coincidence problem that appears in the
original Einstein universe model is shown to arise from a misunderstanding
about the magnitude of dark energy density and the epoch time governing the
appearance of the integer relation between dark energy and normal energy
density. The solution to the generic case then clearly points to the source of
the time coincidence integer problem in the Friedman dust universe model. It is
then possible to eliminate this coincidence by removing a degeneracy between
different measurement epoch times. In this paper's first appendix, a
fundamental time dependent relation between dark mass and dark energy is
derived with suggestions how this relation could explain cosmological voids and
the clumping of dark mass to become visible matter. In this paper's second
appendix, it is shown that that dark energy is a conserved with time substance
that is everywhere and for all time permeable to the dark mass and visible mass
of which the contracting or expanding universe is composed. The last two
appendices involve detailed studies of cosmology, quantum dark energy related
issues. There are more detailed abstracts given with all four appendices.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Wind shortwave instability of a foam layer between the atmosphere and the
ocean is examined in order to reach greater understanding of the recent
findings of the decrease in momentum transfer from hurricane winds to sea
waves. The three-fluid configuration with the high contrasts in densities of
the air, foam and water provides for an effective mechanism to stabilize the
water surface.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Using experimental longitudinal and transverse velocities data for very high
Reynolds number turbulence, we study both anisotropy and asymmetry of
turbulence. These both seem to be related to small scale turbulent structures,
and to intermittency. We may assume that the large scale velocity shear gives
an impact into the small scale turbulence, resulting in non-locality, and
related anomalous events.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A cell method is developed, which takes into account the bubble geometry of
polyhedral foams, and provides for the generalized Rayleigh-Plesset equation
that contains the non-local in time term corresponding to heat relaxation. The
Rayleigh-Plesset equation together with the equations of mass and momentum
balances for an effective single-phase inviscid fluid yield a model for foam
acoustics. The present calculations reconcile observed sound velocity and
attenuation with those predicted using the assumption that thermal dissipation
is the dominant damping mechanism in a range of foam expansions and sound
excitation frequencies.

Categories: quant-ph, gr-qc, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We propose an experiment for generating and detecting vacuum-induced
dissipative motion. A high frequency mechanical resonator driven in resonance
is expected to dissipate energy in quantum vacuum via photon emission. The
photons are stored in a high quality electromagnetic cavity and detected
through their interaction with ultracold alkali-metal atoms prepared in an
inverted population of hyperfine states. Superradiant amplification of the
generated photons results in a detectable radio-frequency signal temporally
distinguishable from the expected background.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: First, dark matter is introduced. Next, the Dirac negative energy state is
rediscussed. It is a negative matter with some new characteristics, which are
mainly the gravitation each other, but the repulsion with all positive matter.
Such the positive and negative matters are two regions of topological
separation in general case, and the negative matter is invisible. It is the
simplest candidate of dark matter, and can explain some characteristics of the
dark matter and dark energy. Recent phantom on dark energy is namely a negative
matter. We propose that in quantum fluctuations the positive matter and
negative matter are created at the same time, and derive an inflation cosmos,
which is created from nothing. The Higgs mechanism is possibly a product of
positive and negative matter. Based on a basic axiom and the two foundational
principles of the negative matter, we research its predictions and possible
theoretical tests, in particular, the season effect. The negative matter should
be a necessary development of Dirac theory. Finally, we propose the three basic
laws of the negative matter. The existence of four matters on positive,
opposite, and negative, negative-opposite particles will form the most perfect
symmetrical world.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, cond-mat.other
Abstract: The accuracy and precision of current atom-interferometric inertialsensors
rival state-of-the-art conventional devices using artifact-based test masses .
Atomic sensors are well suited for fundamental measurements of gravito-inertial
fields. The sensitivity required to test gravitational theories can be achieved
by extending the baseline of the interferometer. The I.C.E.
(Interf\'erom\'etrie Coh\'erente pour l'Espace) interferometer aims to achieve
long interrogation times in compact apparatus via reduced gravity. We have
tested a cold-atom source during airplane parabolic flights. We show that this
environment is compatible with free-fall interferometric measurements using up
to 4 second interrogation time. We present the next-generation apparatus using
degenerate gases for low release-velocity atomic sources in space-borne
experiments.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The corrections to g-mode frequencies caused by the presence of a central
magnetic field and rotation of the Sun are calculated. The calculations are
carried out in the simple one dimensional magnetohydrodynamical model using the
approximations which allow one to find the purely analytical spectra of
magneto-gravity waves beyond the scope of the JWKB approximation and avoid in a
small background magnetic field the appearance of the cusp resonance which
locks a wave within the radiative zone. These analytic results are compared
with the satellite observations of the g-mode frequency shifts which are of the
order one per cent as given in the GOLF experiment at the SoHO board. The main
contribution turns out to be the magnetic frequency shift in the strong
magnetic field which obeys the used approximations. In particular, the fixed
magnetic field strength 700 KG results in the mentioned value of the frequency
shift for the g-mode of the radial order n=-10. The rotational shift due to the
Coriolis force appears to be small and does not exceed a fracton of per cent,
\alpha_\Omega < 0.003.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The evolution and propagation of a partially coherent matter wave (PCMW) is
investigated theoretically by the correlation function method. The ABCD matrix
formalism previously used for a fully coherent matter wave is extended to the
PCMW domain. A new ABCD law is derived, using a tensor method to describe the
evolution of a PCMW. An analytical solution of the first-order correlation
function is obtained that makes the propagation and evolution of a PCMW very
simple and clear. As an example, the propagation of a PCMW in a gravitational
field is calculated numerically.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We consider a large class of optical cavities and gain media with an off-axis
external feedback which introduces a two-point nonlocality. This nonlocality
moves the lasing threshold and opens large windows of control parameters where
weak light spots can be strongly amplified while the background radiation
remains very low. Furthermore, transverse phase and group velocities of a
signal can be independently tuned and this enables to steer it non
mechanically, to control its spatial chirping and to split it into two
counter-propagating ones.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.med-ph
Abstract: We compare the plasma and cavitation dynamics underlying pulsed laser
microsurgery in water and in fruit fly embryos (in vivo) - specifically for
nanosecond pulses at 355 and 532 nm. We find two key differences. First, the
plasma-formation thresholds are lower in vivo - especially at 355 nm - due to
the presence of endogenous chromophores that serve as additional sources for
plasma seed electrons. Second, the biological matrix constrains the growth of
laser-induced cavitation bubbles. Both effects reduce the disrupted region in
vivo when compared to extrapolations from measurements in water.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.atom-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: We study the two-photon process for the transitions ns --> 1s and nd --> 1s
in hydrogen up to large n. For n<=20 we provide simple analytic fitting
formulae to describe the non-resonant part of the two-photon emission profiles.
Combining these with the analytic form of the cascade-term yields a simple and
accurate description of the full two-photon decay spectrum, which only involves
a sum over a few intermediate states. We demonstrate that the cascade term
naturally leads to a nearly Lorentzian shape of the two-photon profiles in the
vicinity of the resonances. However, due to quantum-electrodynamical
corrections, the two-photon emission spectra deviate significantly from the
Lorentzian shape in the very distant wings of the resonances. We investigate up
to which distance the two-photon profiles are close to a Lorentzian and discuss
the role of the interference term. We then analyze how the deviation of the
two-photon profiles from the Lorentzian shape affects the dynamics of
cosmological hydrogen recombination. Since in this context the escape of
photons from the Lyman-alpha resonance plays a crucial role, we concentrate on
the two-photon corrections in the vicinity of the Lyman-alpha line. Our
computations show that the changes in the ionization history due to the
additional two-photon process from high shell (n>2) likely do not reach the
percent-level. For conservative assumptions we find a correction DN_e/N_e~-0.4%
at redshift z~1160. This is numerically similar to the result of another recent
study; however, the physics leading to this conclusion is rather different. In
particular, our calculations of the effective two-photon decay rates yield
significantly different values, where the destructive interference of the
resonant and non-resonant terms plays a crucial role in this context (abridged)

Categories: cond-mat.str-el, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Starting from the Ginzburg-Landau free energy describing the normal state to
Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferrell (LOFF) state transition, we evaluate the free
energy of seven most common lattice structures such as stripe, square,
triangular,Simple Cubic (SC), Face centered Cubic (FCC),Body centered Cubic
(BCC) and Quasi-crystal (QC). We find that the stripe phase which is the
original LO state, is the most stable phase. This result maybe relevant to the
detection of LOFF state in some heavy fermion compounds and the pairing lattice
structure of fermions with unequal populations in the BCS side of Feshbach
resonance in ultra-cold atoms.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We discover several magnetic Feshbach resonances in collisions of ultracold
K(39) atoms, by studying atom losses and molecule formation. Accurate
determination of the magnetic-field resonance locations allows us to optimize a
quantum collision model for potassium isotopes. We employ the model to predict
the magnetic-field dependence of scattering lengths and of near-threshold
molecular levels. Our findings will be useful to plan future experiments on
ultracold potassium atoms and molecules.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper the motion of ultrahigh energy particles produced in sasefel is
investigated. The critical field which opose the acceleration of the ultra high
energy particles is calculated

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We study the expansion of ultracold neutral plasmas in the regime in which
inelastic collisions are negligible. The plasma expands due to the thermal
pressure of the electrons, and for an initial spherically symmetric Gaussian
density profle, the expansion is self-similar. Measurements of the plasma size
and ion kinetic energy using fluorescence imaging and spectroscopy show that
the expansion follows an analytic solution of the Vlasov equations for an
adiabatically expanding plasma.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: A novel method to estimate the pixels simultaneous detection probability and
the spatial resolution of pixelized detectors is proposed, which is based on
the determination of the statistical correlations between detector neighbor
pixels. The correlations are determined by means of noise variance measurement
for a isolated pixels and the difference between neighbor pixels. The method is
validated using images from the two different GE Senographe 2000D mammographic
units. The pixelized detector has been irradiated using x-rays along its entire
surface. It is shown that the pixel simultaneous detection probabilities can be
estimated within accuracy 0.001 - 0.003, where the systematic error is
estimated to be smaller than 0.005. The presampled two-dimensional point-spread
function (PSF0) is determined using a single Gaussian and a sum of two Gaussian
approximations. The obtained results for the presampled PSF0 show that the
single Gaussian approximation is not appropriate, and the sum of two Gaussian
approximations providing the best fit predicts the existence of a large (~50%)
narrow component. Another proof of this fact is the latest simulation study of
columnar indirect digital detectors by A. Badano et al. The sampled
two-dimensional PSF is determined using Monte Carlo simulation for the L-shape
uniform distributed acceptance function for different values of fill factors.
The detector spatial resolution is estimated using sampled PSF and has values
54 and 58 mkm for two different units. The calculation of the presampled
modulation transfer function based on the PSF0 estimation shows that the
existing data can only be reproduced using a single Gaussian approximation and
the usage of the sum of two Gaussian show significantly larger values in the
higher frequency region for both units.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The redshift-distance modulus relation, the Hubble Diagram, derived from
Cosmological General Relativity has been extended to arbitrarily large
redshifts. Numerical methods were employed and a density function was found
that results in a valid solution of the field equations at all redshifts. The
extension has been compared to 302 type Ia supernova data as well as to 69
Gamma-ray burst data. The latter however do not not truly represent a `standard
candle' as the derived distance modulii are not independent of the cosmology
used. Nevertheless the analysis shows a good fit can be achieved without the
need to assume the existence of dark matter.
  The Carmelian theory is also shown to describe a universe that is always
spatially flat. This results from the underlying assumption of the energy
density of a cosmological constant $\Omega_{\Lambda} = 1$, the result of vacuum
energy. The curvature of the universe is described by a \textit{spacevelocity}
metric where the energy content of the curvature at any epoch is $\Omega_K =
\Omega_{\Lambda} - \Omega = 1-\Omega$, where $\Omega$ is the matter density of
the universe. Hence the total density is always $\Omega_K + \Omega = 1$

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The OPERA experiment, designed to conclusively prove the existence of $\rm
\nu_\mu \to \nu_\tau$ oscillations in the atmospheric sector, makes use of a
massive lead-nuclear emulsion target to observe the appearance of $\rm
\nu_\tau$'s in the CNGS $\rm \nu_\mu$ beam. The location and analysis of the
neutrino interactions in quasi real-time required the development of fast
computer-controlled microscopes able to reconstruct particle tracks with
sub-micron precision and high efficiency at a speed of 20 cm^2 / h. This paper
describes the performance in particle track reconstruction of the European
Scanning System, a novel automatic microscope for the measurement of emulsion
films developed for OPERA.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In Lagrangian turbulence one is faced with the puzzle that 2D
  Navier-Stokes flows are nearly as intermittent as in three dimensions
although no intermittency is present in the inverse cascade in 2D Eulerian
turbulence. In addition, an inertial range is very difficult to detect and it
is questionable whether it exists at all. Here, we investigate the transition
of Eulerian to Lagrangian probability density functions (PDFs) which leads to a
new type of Lagrangian structure function. This possesses an extended inertial
range similar to the case of tracer particles in a frozen turbulent velocity
field. This allows a connection to the scaling of Eulerian transversal
structure functions.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In this paper we investigate the impact of the floating-point precision and
interpolation scheme on the results of direct numerical simulations (DNS) of
turbulence by pseudo-spectral codes. Three different types of floating-point
precision configurations show no differences in the statistical results. This
implies that single precision computations allow for increased Reynolds numbers
due to the reduced amount of memory needed. The interpolation scheme for
obtaining velocity values at particle positions has a noticeable impact on the
Lagrangian acceleration statistics. A tri-cubic scheme results in a slightly
broader acceleration probability density function than a tri-linear scheme.
Furthermore the scaling behavior obtained by the cubic interpolation scheme
exhibits a tendency towards a slightly increased degree of intermittency
compared to the linear one.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Two evolutionary lineages: Machiavellian and Bohrian intelligence
  Mutation and natural selection are the two most basic processes of evolution,
yet the study of their interplay remains a challenge for theoretical and
empirical research. Darwinian evolution favors genotypes with high replication
rates, a process called survival of the fittest representing lineage of the
Machiavellian inteligence. According to quasi-species theory, selection favors
the cloud of genotypes, interconnected by mutation, whose average replication
rate is highest: mutation acts as a selective agent to shape the entire genome
so that is robust with respect to mutation. Thus survival of the flattest and
inventivest representing lineage of the Bohrian intelligence at high mutation
rates. Quasi-species theory predicts that, under appropriate conditions (high
mutation pressure), such a mutation can be fixed in an evolving population,
despite its lower replication rate.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Gillevinia straata, the scientific name [1, 2] recognizing the first
extraterrestrial living form ever nomenclated, as well as the existence of a
new biological kingdom, Jakobia, in a new biosphere -Marciana- of what now has
become the living system Solaria, is grounded on old evidence reinterpreted in
the light of newly acquired facts. The present exposition provides a summary
overview of all these grounds, outlined here as follows. A more detailed paper
is being prepared for publication.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Magnification of subwavelength field distributions using a wire medium slab
operating in the canalization regime is demonstrated using numerical
simulations. The magnifying slab is implemented by radially enlarging the
distance between adjacent wires, and the operational frequency is tuned to
coincide with the Fabry-Perot resonance condition. The near-field distribution
of a complex-shaped source is canalized over an electrical distance
corresponding roughly to $3\lambda$, and the distribution details are magnified
by a factor of three. The operation of the slab is studied at several
frequencies deviating from the Fabry-Perot resonance.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This paper is a short commentary on the 2005 paper in Nature by S. Rainville
et al., which claimed to be ``the most precise direct test of the famous
equation", E = mc^2. This communication is directed only to the readers who are
familiar with the earlier papers by the author on the subject of mass-energy
equivalence.

Categories: cond-mat.dis-nn, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: This is the first paper of a series of three, reporting on numerical
simulation studies of geometric and mechanical properties of static assemblies
of spherical beads under an isotropic pressure. Frictionless systems assemble
in the unique random close packing (RCP) state in the low pressure limit if the
compression process is fast enough, slower processes inducing traces of
crystallization, and exhibit specific properties directly related to
isostaticity of the force-carrying structure. The different structures of
frictional packings assembled by various methods cannot be classified by the
sole density. While lubricated systems approach RCP densities and coordination
number z^*~=6 on the backbone in the rigid limit, an idealized "vibration"
procedure results in equally dense configurations with z^*~=4.5. Near neighbor
correlations on various scales are computed and compared to available
laboratory data, although z^* values remain experimentally inaccessible. Low
coordination packings have many rattlers (more than 10% of the grains carry no
force), which should be accounted for on studying position correlations, and a
small proportion of harmless "floppy modes" associated with divalent grains.
Frictional packings, however slowly assembled under low pressure, retain a
finite level of force indeterminacy, except in the limit of infinite friction.

Categories: cond-mat.dis-nn, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: This is the second paper of a series of three investigating, by numerical
means, the geometric and mechanical properties of spherical bead packings under
isotropic stresses. We study the effects of varying the applied pressure P
(from 1 or 10 kPa up to 100 MPa in the case of glass beads) on several types of
configurations assembled by different procedures, as reported in the preceding
paper. As functions of P, we monitor changes in solid fraction \Phi,
coordination number z, proportion of rattlers (grains carrying no force) x0,
the distribution of normal forces, the level of friction mobilization, and the
distribution of near neighbor distances. Assuming the contact law does not
involve material plasticity or damage, \Phi is found to vary very nearly
reversibly with P in an isotropic compression cycle, but all other quantities,
due to the frictional hysteresis of contact forces, change irreversibly. In
particular, initial low P states with high coordination numbers lose many
contacts in a compression cycle, and end up with values of z and x0 close to
those of the most poorly coordinated initial configurations. Proportional load
variations which do not entail notable configuration changes can therefore
nevertheless significantly affect contact networks of granular packings in
quasistatic conditions.

Categories: cond-mat.dis-nn, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: In this third and final paper of a series, elastic properties of numerically
simulated isotropic packings of spherical beads assembled by different
procedures and subjected to a varying confining pressure P are investigated. In
addition P, which determines the stiffness of contacts by Hertz's law, elastic
moduli are chiefly sensitive to the coordination number, the possible values of
which are not necessarily correlated with the density. Comparisons of numerical
and experimental results for glass beads in the 10kPa-10MPa range reveal
similar differences between dry samples compacted by vibrations and lubricated
packings. The greater stiffness of the latter, in spite of their lower density,
can hence be attributed to a larger coordination number. Voigt and Reuss bounds
bracket bulk modulus B accurately, but simple estimation schemes fail for shear
modulus G, especially in poorly coordinated configurations under low P.
Tenuous, fragile networks respond differently to changes in load direction, as
compared to load intensity. The shear modulus, in poorly coordinated packings,
tends to vary proportionally to the degree of force indeterminacy per unit
volume. The elastic range extends to small strain intervals, in agreement with
experimental observations. The origins of nonelastic response are discussed. We
conclude that elastic moduli provide access to mechanically important
information about coordination numbers, which escape direct measurement
techniques, and indicate further perspectives.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We present a new design of dielectric microcavities supporting modes with
large quality factors and highly directional light emission. The key idea is to
place a point scatterer inside a dielectric circular microdisk. We show that,
depending on the position and strength of the scatterer, this leads to strongly
directional modes in various frequency regions while preserving the high
Q-factors reminiscent of the whispering gallery modes of the microdisk without
scatterer. The design is very appealing due to its simplicity, promising a
cleaner experimental realisation than previously studied microcavity designs on
the one hand and analytic tractability based on Green's function techniques and
self-adjoint extension theory on the other.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, math.CO
Abstract: We consider the size and structure of the automorphism groups of a variety of
empirical `real-world' networks and find that, in contrast to classical random
graph models, many real-world networks are richly symmetric. We relate
automorphism group structure to network topology and discuss generic forms of
symmetry and their origin in real-world networks.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Two different metrics are used to assess Forster resonance energy transfer
(FRET) between fluorophores in the steady state: (1) acceptor-quenching of
donor fluorescence, E (a.k.a. transfer efficiency); and (ii) donor-excited
acceptor fluorescence, F-A-Dex. While E is still more widely used, F-A-Dex has
been gaining in popularity for practical reasons among experimentalists who
study biomembranes. Here, for the special case of membrane-bound fluorophores,
we present a substantial body of experimental evidence that justifies the use
of simple Stern-Volmer expressions when modeling either FRET metric under
dilute-probe conditions. We have also discovered a dilute-regime correspondence
between our Stern-Volmer expression for E and Wolber and Hudson's series
approximation for steady-state Forster quenching in 2D. This novel
correspondence allows us to interpret each of our 2D quenching constants in
terms of both (i) an effective Forster distance, and (ii) two maximum
acceptor-concentration limits, each of which defines its own useful
experimental regime. Taken together, our results suggest a three-step strategy
toward designing more effective steady-state FRET experiments for the study of
biomembranes.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We study a simple model of information propagation in social networks, where
two quantities are introduced: the spread factor, which measures the average
maximal fraction of neighbors of a given node that interchange information
among each other, and the spreading time needed for the information to reach
such fraction of nodes. When the information refers to a particular node at
which both quantities are measured, the model can be taken as a model for
gossip propagation. In this context, we apply the model to real empirical
networks of social acquaintances and compare the underlying spreading dynamics
with different types of scale-free and small-world networks. We find that the
number of friendship connections strongly influences the probability of being
gossiped. Finally, we discuss how the spread factor is able to be applied to
other situations.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: An approximation of the real line shape of a scintillation detector with a
generalized gamma distribution is proposed. The approximation describes the
ideal scintillation line shape better than the conventional normal
distribution. Two parameters of the proposed function are uniquely defined by
the first two moments of the detector response.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, cond-mat.str-el, physics.optics
Abstract: We describe an experimental setup designed to produce ultracold trapped gas
clouds of fermionic 6Li and bosonic 87Rb. This combination of alkali metals has
the potential to reach deeper Fermi degeneracy with respect to other mixtures
since it allows for improved heat capacity matching which optimizes sympathetic
cooling efficiency. Atomic beams of the two species are independently produced
and then decelerated by Zeeman slowers. The slowed atoms are collected into a
magneto-optical trap and then transferred into a quadrupole magnetic trap. An
ultracold Fermi gas with temperature in the 10^-3 T_F range should be
attainable through selective confinement of the two species via a properly
detuned laser beam focused in the center of the magnetic trap.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Traceroute sampling is an important technique in exploring the internet
router graph and the autonomous system graph. Although it is one of the primary
techniques used in calculating statistics about the internet, it can introduce
bias that corrupts these estimates. This paper reports on a theoretical and
experimental investigation of a new technique to reduce the bias of traceroute
sampling when estimating the degree distribution. We develop a new estimator
for the degree of a node in a traceroute-sampled graph; validate the estimator
theoretically in Erdos-Renyi graphs and, through computer experiments, for a
wider range of graphs; and apply it to produce a new picture of the degree
distribution of the autonomous system graph.

Categories: physics.data-an, q-fin.ST
Abstract: The ARCH process (R. F. Engle, 1982) constitutes a paradigmatic generator of
stochastic time series with time-dependent variance like it appears on a wide
broad of systems besides economics in which ARCH was born. Although the ARCH
process captures the so-called "volatility clustering" and the asymptotic
power-law probability density distribution of the random variable, it is not
capable to reproduce further statistical properties of many of these time
series such as: the strong persistence of the instantaneous variance
characterised by large values of the Hurst exponent (H > 0.8), and asymptotic
power-law decay of the absolute values self-correlation function. By means of
considering an effective return obtained from a correlation of past returns
that has a q-exponential form we are able to fix the limitations of the
original model. Moreover, this improvement can be obtained through the correct
choice of a sole additional parameter, $q_{m}$. The assessment of its validity
and usefulness is made by mimicking daily fluctuations of SP500 financial
index.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We resolve the long standing controversy regarding the imaging by a planar
lens made of left-handed media and demonstrate theoretically that its far field
image has a fundamentally different origin depending on the relationship
between losses {inside} the lens and the wavelength of the light $\lambda$. At
small enough $\lambda$ the image is always governed by diffraction theory, and
the resolution is independent of the absorption if both Im$\epsilon \ll 1$ and
Im$\mu \ll 1$. For any finite $\lambda$, however, a critical absorption exists
below which the superresolution regime takes place, though this absorption is
extremely low and can hardly be achieved. We demonstrate that the transition
between diffraction limited and superresolution regimes is governed by {the}
universal parameter combining absorption, wavelength, and lens thickness.
Finally, we show that this parameter is related to the resonant excitation of
the surface plasma waves.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, cond-mat.other
Abstract: We illustrate that open quantum systems composed of neutral, ultracold atoms
in one-dimensional optical lattices can exhibit behavior analogous to
semiconductor electronic circuits. A correspondence is demonstrated for bosonic
atoms, and the experimental requirements to realize these devices are
established. The analysis follows from a derivation of a quantum master
equation for this general class of open quantum systems.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This papers aims at revisiting Minkowski space-time with a modified outlook
and making it more consistent (III.8). The paper scrutinizes the special case
of relativistic hypothesis (STR). The paper tries to solve the problems faced
by relativistic hypothesis by proposing a purely mathematically formulated
reference (and not a frame like aether) frame that suits string theory. Then
checking the validity of the frame by applying to various phenomenon and
aspects explained by STR; and also its properties when the experimental
statistics are taken into account in a homogeneous and isotropic large scale
structure of Universe. Further more the paper checks whether introducing the
frame solves the problems in STR; then looks into the occurrences of new
paradoxes in the frame, if any present.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In a recent work [Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 023004 (2007)] we have investigated
the influence of attractive van der Waals interaction on the pair distribution
and Penning ionization dynamics of ultracold Rydberg gases. Here we extend this
description to atoms initially prepared in Rydberg states exhibiting repulsive
interaction. We present calculations based on a Monte Carlo algorithm to
simulate the dynamics of many atoms under the influence of both repulsive and
attractive longrange interatomic forces. Redistribution to nearby states
induced by black body radiation is taken into account, changing the effective
interaction potentials. The model agrees with experimental observations, where
the ionization rate is found to increase when the excitation laser is
blue-detuned from the atomic resonance.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: The effect of the Pauli exclusion principle on double ionization of He atoms
by strong, linearly polarized laser pulses is analyzed. We show that correlated
electron escape, with electron momenta symmetric with respect to the field
polarization axis, is suppressed if atoms are initially prepared in the
metastable state 3S. The effect is a consequence of selection rules for the
transition to the appropriate outgoing two-electron states. We illustrate the
suppression in numerical calculations of electron and ion momentum
distributions within a reduced dimensionality model.

Categories: q-fin.TR, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Anchoring is a term used in psychology to describe the common human tendency
to rely too heavily (anchor) on one piece of information when making decisions.
A trading algorithm inspired by biological motors, introduced by L.
Gil\cite{Gil}, is suggested as a testing ground for anchoring in financial
markets. An exact solution of the algorithm is presented for arbitrary price
distributions. Furthermore the algorithm is extended to cover the case of a
market neutral portfolio, revealing additional evidence that anchoring is
involved in the decision making of market participants. The exposure of
arbitrage possibilities created by anchoring gives yet another illustration on
the difficulty proving market efficiency by only considering lower order
correlations in past price time series

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: As an example of thin composite layers we consider single and double grids of
periodically arranged interacting wires loaded with a certain distributed
reactive impedance. Currents induced to the wires by a normally incident plane
wave are rigorously calculated and the corresponding dipole moment densities
are determined. Using this data and the averaged fields we assign mesoscopic
material parameters for the proposed grid structures. These parameters depend
on the number of grids, and measure the averaged induced polarizations. It is
demonstrated that properly loaded double grids possess polarization response
that over some frequency range can be described by assigning negative values
for the mesoscopic parameters. Discussion is conducted on the physical
meaningfulness to assign such material parameters for thin composite slabs. The
results predicted by the proposed method for the double-grid structures are
compared with the results obtained using the commonly adopted S-parameter
retrieval procedure.

Categories: q-bio.QM, physics.data-an, q-bio.PE
Abstract: From the spectral plot of the (normalized) graph Laplacian, the essential
qualitative properties of a network can be simultaneously deduced. Given a
class of empirical networks, reconstruction schemes for elucidating the
evolutionary dynamics leading to those particular data can then be developed.
This method is exemplified for protein-protein interaction networks. Traces of
their evolutionary history of duplication and divergence processes are
identified. In particular, we can identify typical specific features that
robustly distinguish protein-protein interaction networks from other classes of
networks, in spite of possible statistical fluctuations of the underlying data.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The statistics behind Bell's inequality is demonstrated to allow a
Kolmogorovian (i.e. classical) model of probabilities that recovers the quantum
covariance.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.ins-det
Abstract: The performance of telescope systems working at microwave or visible/IR
wavelengths is typically described in terms of different parameters according
to the wavelength range. Most commercial ray tracing packages have been
specifically designed for use with visible/IR systems and thus, though very
flexible and sophisticated, do not provide the appropriate parameters to fully
describe microwave antennas, and thus to compare with specifications. In this
work we demonstrate that the Strehl ratio is equal to the phase efficiency when
the apodization factor is taken into account. The phase efficiency is the most
critical contribution to the aperture efficiency of an antenna, and the most
difficult parameter to optimize during the telescope design. The equivalence
between the Strehl ratio and the phase efficiency gives the designer/user of
the telescope the opportunity to use the faster commercial ray-tracing software
to optimize the design. We also discuss the results of several tests performed
to check the validity of this relationship that we carried out using a
ray-tracing software, ZEMAX and a full Physical Optics software, GRASP9.3,
applied to three different telescope designs that span a factor of $\simeq 10
in terms of D/lambda. The maximum measured discrepancy between phase efficiency
and Strehl ratio varies between $\simeq 0.4 and 1.9 up to an offset angle of
>40 beams, depending on the optical configuration, but it is always less than
0.5 where the Strehl ratio is >0.95.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The efficiency of a coherent VUV source at 125 nm, based on 2-photon resonant
four-wave mixing in mercury vapor, has been enhanced by up to 2 orders of
magnitude. This enhancement was obtained by locally heating a liquid Hg surface
with a pulsed excimer laser, resulting in a high density vapor plume in which
the nonlinear interaction occurred. Energies up to 5 &#956;J (1 kW peak power)
have been achieved while keeping the overall Hg cell at room temperature,
avoiding the use of a complex heat pipe. We have observed a strong saturation
of the VUV yield when peak power densities of the fundamental beams exceed the
GW/cm2 range, as well as a large intensity-dependant broadening (up to ~30
cm-1) of the two-photon resonance. The source has potential applications for
high resolution interference lithography and photochemistry.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: The quantum-classical hybrid-description of rare-gas clusters interacting
with intense light pulses which we have developed is described in detail. Much
emphasis is put on the treatment of screening electrons in the cluster which
set the time scale for the evolution of the system and form the link between
electrons strongly bound to ions and quasi-free plasma electrons in the
cluster. As an example we discuss the dynamics of an Ar147 cluster exposed to a
short VUV laser pulse of 20eV photon energy.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: Attosecond laser pulses open the door to resolve microscopic electron
dynamics in time. Experiments performed include the decay of a core hole, the
time-resolved measurement of photo ionization and electron tunneling. The
processes investigated share the coherent character of the dynamics involving
very few, ideally one active electron. Here, we introduce a scheme to probe
dissipative multi-electron motion in time. In this context attosecond probing
enables one to obtain information which is lost at later times and cannot be
retrieved by conventional methods in the energy domain due to the incoherent
nature of the dynamics. As a specific example we will discuss the charging of a
rare-gas cluster during a strong femtosecond pulse with attosecond pulses. The
example illustrates the proposed use of attosecond pulses and suggests an
experimental resolution of a controversy about the mechanism of energy
absorption by rare-gas clusters in strong vacuum-ultraviolet (VUV) pulses.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Hall magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) with electron inertia is considered. A much
wider class of equilibrium solutions and the concomitant self-organization
aspects are discussed. The force-free field state B - J is shown to be a
consequence of the triple Beltrami condition.

Categories: math-ph, math.MP, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The analysis of the dynamics of a material point perfectly constrained to a
submanifold of the three-dimensional euclidean space and subjected to a locally
conservative force's field, namely a force's field corresponding to a closed
but not necessarily exact differential form on such a submanifold, requires a
generalization of the Lagrangian and the Hamiltonian formalism that is here
developed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We have used the free expansion of ultracold neutral plasmas as a
time-resolved probe of electron temperature. A combination of experimental
measurements of the ion expansion velocity and numerical simulations
characterize the crossover from an elastic-collision regime at low initial
Gamma_e, which is dominated by adiabatic cooling of the electrons, to the
regime of high Gamma_e in which inelastic processes drastically heat the
electrons. We identify the time scales and relative contributions of various
processes, and experimentally show the importance of radiative decay and
disorder-induced electron heating for the first time in ultracold neutral
plasmas.

Categories: gr-qc, hep-th, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The coupling of the electromagnetic field to gravity is discussed. In the
premetric axiomatic approach based on the experimentally well established
conservation laws of electric charge and magnetic flux, the Maxwell equations
are the same irrespective of the presence or absence of gravity. In this sense,
one can say that the charge "substratum" and the flux "substratum" are not
influenced by the gravitational field directly. However, the interrelation
between these fundamental substrata, formalized as the {\it spacetime relation}
H=H(F) between the 2-forms of the electromagnetic excitation H and the
electromagnetic field strength F, is affected by gravity. Thus the validity of
the equivalence principle for electromagnetism depends on the form of the
spacetime relation. We discuss the nonlocal and local linear constitutive
relations and demonstrate that the spacetime metric can be accompanied also by
skewon, dilaton, and axion fields. All these premetric companions of the metric
may eventually lead to a violation of the equivalence principle.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: This paper presents a model of the dynamics of the wage income distribution.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: The transverse motion inside a Stark decelerator plays a large role in the
total efficiency of deceleration. We differentiate between two separate regimes
of molecule loss during the slowing process. The first mechanism involves
distributed loss due to coupling of transverse and longitudinal motion, while
the second is a result of the rapid decrease of the molecular velocity within
the final few stages. In this work, we describe these effects and present means
for overcoming them. Solutions based on modified switching time sequences with
the existing decelerator geometry lead to a large gain of stable molecules in
the intermediate velocity regime, but fail to address the loss at very low
final velocities. We propose a new decelerator design, the quadrupole-guiding
decelerator, which eliminates distributed loss due to transverse/longitudinal
couplings throughout the slowing process and also exhibits gain over normal
deceleration to the lowest velocities.

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.PS
Abstract: We address surface solitons supported by the interface of optical lattices
imprinted in saturable media with surface-localized gain. The nonlinearity
saturation puts restrictions on the maximal energy flow carried by surface
solitons. As a consequence, the presence of thin amplifying layer near the
surface results in the controllable emission of solitons towards the lattice at
angles depending on the amplification rate and on lattice depth.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We consider transmission band edge resonance in periodic layered structures
involving birefringent layers. Previously we have shown that the presence of
birefringent layers with misaligned in-plane anisotropy can dramatically
enhance the performance of the photonic-crystal Fabry-Perot resonator. It
allows to reduce its size by an order of magnitude without compromising on its
performance. The key characteristic of the enhanced photonic-crystal cavity is
that its Bloch dispersion relation displays a degenerate photonic band edge,
rather than only regular ones. This can be realized in specially arranged
stacks of misaligned anisotropic layers. On the down side, the presence of
birefringent layers results in the Fabry-Perot resonance being coupled only
with one (elliptic) polarization component of the incident wave, while the
other polarization component is reflected back to space. In this paper we show
how a small modification of the periodic layered array can solve the above
fundamental problem and provide a perfect impedance match regardless of the
incident wave polarization, while preserving the giant transmission resonance,
characteristic of a degenerate photonic band edge. Both features are of
critical importance for a variety of practical applications, including
antennas, light amplification, optical and microwave filters, etc.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The composite torsional ultrasonic oscillator, a versatile experimental
system, can be used to investigate slip of Newtonian fluid at a smooth surface.
A rigorous analysis of slip-dependent damping for the oscillator is presented.
Initially, the phenomenon of finite surface slip and the slip length are
considered for a half-space of Newtonian fluid in contact with a smooth,
oscillating solid surface. Definitions are revisited and clarified in light of
inconsistencies in the literature. We point out that, in general oscillating
flows, Navier's slip length b is a complex number. An intuitive velocity
discontinuity parameter of unrestricted phase is used to describe the effect of
slip on measurement of viscous shear damping. The analysis is applied to the
composite oscillator and preliminary experimental work for a 40 kHz oscillator
is presented. The Non-Slip Boundary Condition (NSBC) has been verified for a
hydrophobic surface in water to within ~60 nm of |b|=0 nm. Experiments were
carried out at shear rate amplitudes between 230 and 6800 /s, corresponding to
linear displacement amplitudes between 3.2 and 96 nm.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: This paper shows experimental evidence of photorefractive steady state
self-focusing in InP:Fe for a wide range of intensities, at both 1.06 and
1.55$\mu$m. To explain those results, it is shown that despite the bi-polar
nature of InP:Fe where one photocarrier and one thermal carrier are to be
considered, the long standing one photocarrier model for photorefractive
solitons can be usefully applied. The relationship between the dark irradiance
stemming out of this model and the known resonance intensity is then discussed.

Categories: astro-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, nucl-th, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Screened potential, modified by non standard electron cloud distributions
responsible for the shielding effect on fusion of reacting nuclei in
astrophysical plasmas, is derived. The case of clouds with depleted tails in
space coordinates is discussed. The modified screened potential is obtained
both from statistical mechanics arguments based on fluctuations of the inverse
of the Debye-Huckel radius and from the solution of a Bernoulli equation used
in generalized statistical mechanics. Plots and tables useful in evaluating
penetration probability at any energy are provided.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: This paper introduces simple analytical formulas for the grid impedance of
electrically dense arrays of square patches and for the surface impedance of
high-impedance surfaces based on the dense arrays of metal strips or square
patches over ground planes. Emphasis is on the oblique-incidence excitation.
The approach is based on the known analytical models for strip grids combined
with the approximate Babinet principle for planar grids located at a dielectric
interface. Analytical expressions for the surface impedance and reflection
coefficient resulting from our analysis are thoroughly verified by full-wave
simulations and compared with available data in open literature for particular
cases. The results can be used in the design of various antennas and microwave
or millimeter wave devices which use artificial impedance surfaces and
artificial magnetic conductors (reflect-array antennas, tunable phase shifters,
etc.), as well as for the derivation of accurate higher-order impedance
boundary conditions for artificial (high-) impedance surfaces. As an example,
the propagation properties of surface waves along the high-impedance surfaces
are studied.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper we suggest a configuration of photons consistent with a spin
$\hbar$, and a configuration of the fermions coherent with a spin $\hbar/2$.
These suggested configurations open the way to further analyses which lead to
the following conclusions:
  - There cannot exist elementary particles of spin $\hbar/2$ with a mass
inferior to $1m_e$ or with a radius greater than $1l_e$.
  - The electrostatic force derives from the centrifugal forces inherent to the
spin and are propagated by photons.
  - The derivation of the electrostatic force explains the existence of
positive and negative charges and Coulomb's law.
  - The enormous differences between the centrifugal forces and the centripetal
forces at the surface of the protons give rise to quantic fluctuations of space
which generate the energy flows necessary for equilibrium. These energy flows
can explain gravitation and the strong force.
  - The mass of the proton, $m_p$, and the mass of the neutron, $m_n$, must
each have a concrete value required for the cohesion of the atomic nuclei. The
suggested hypoteses show that the relation $m_n/m_p$ must be very slightly
greater than 1.00, and that, by a first approximation, both $m_n$ and $m_p$
must be slightly less than 1851 $m_e$.
  - There are no "gravitons" and no "gluons"; the "messenger particles" are
always the very real photons.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The relaxation of a dewetting contact line is investigated theoretically in
the so-called "Landau-Levich" geometry in which a vertical solid plate is
withdrawn from a bath of partially wetting liquid. The study is performed in
the framework of lubrication theory, in which the hydrodynamics is resolved at
all length scales (from molecular to macroscopic). We investigate the
bifurcation diagram for unperturbed contact lines, which turns out to be more
complex than expected from simplified 'quasi-static' theories based upon an
apparent contact angle. Linear stability analysis reveals that below the
critical capillary number of entrainment, Ca_c, the contact line is linearly
stable at all wavenumbers. Away from the critical point the dispersion relation
has an asymptotic behaviour sigma~|q| and compares well to a quasi-static
approach. Approaching Ca_c, however, a different mechanism takes over and the
dispersion evolves from |q| to the more common q^2. These findings imply that
contact lines can not be treated as universal objects governed by some
effective law for the macroscopic contact angle, but viscous effects have to be
treated explicitly.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The dynamics of receding contact lines is investigated experimentally through
controlled perturbations of a meniscus in a dip coating experiment. We first
characterize stationary menisci and their breakdown at the coating transition.
It is then shown that the dynamics of both liquid deposition and
long-wavelength perturbations adiabatically follow these stationary states.
This provides a first experimental access to the entire bifurcation diagram of
dynamical wetting, confirming the hydrodynamic theory developed in Part 1. In
contrast to quasi-static theories based on a dynamic contact angle, we
demonstrate that the transition strongly depends on the large scale flow
geometry. We then establish the dispersion relation for large wavenumbers, for
which we find that sigma is linear in q. The speed dependence of sigma is well
described by hydrodynamic theory, in particular the absence of diverging
time-scales at the critical point. Finally, we highlight some open problems
related to contact angle hysteresis that lead beyond the current description.

Categories: nlin.SI, math-ph, math.MP, physics.acc-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The Vlasov equation for the collisionless evolution of the single-particle
probability distribution function (PDF) is a well-known Lie-Poisson Hamiltonian
system. Remarkably, the operation of taking the moments of the Vlasov PDF
preserves the Lie-Poisson structure. The individual particle motions correspond
to singular solutions of the Vlasov equation. The paper focuses on singular
solutions of the problem of geodesic motion of the Vlasov moments. These
singular solutions recover geodesic motion of the individual particles.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.other, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.OT
Abstract: We investigate the hydrodynamic interactions between microorganisms swimming
at low Reynolds number. By considering simple model swimmers, and combining
analytic and numerical approaches, we investigate the time-averaged flow field
around a swimmer. At short distances the swimmer behaves like a pump. At large
distances the velocity field depends on whether the swimming stroke is
invariant under a combined time-reversal and parity transformation. We then
consider two swimmers and find that the interaction between them consists of
two parts; a dead term, independent of the motion of the second swimmer, which
takes the expected dipolar form and a live term resulting from the simultaneous
swimming action of both swimmers which does not. We argue that, in general, the
latter dominates. The swimmer--swimmer interaction is a complicated function of
their relative displacement, orientation and phase, leading to motion that can
be attractive, repulsive or oscillatory.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.ins-det, physics.optics
Abstract: Electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) is predicted for x rays in
laser-dressed neon gas. The x-ray photoabsorption cross section and
polarizability near the Ne K edge are calculated using an ab initio theory
suitable for optical strong-field problems. The laser wavelength is tuned close
to the transition between 1s^-1 3s and 1s^-1 3p (approximately 800nm). The
minimum laser intensity required to observe EIT is of the order of 10^12
W/cm^2. The ab initio results are discussed in terms of an exactly solvable
three-level model. This work opens new opportunities for research with
ultrafast x-ray sources.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: In this paper a systematic approach to the design of bulk isotropic magnetic
metamaterials is presented. The role of the symmetries of both the constitutive
element and the lattice are analyzed. For this purpose it is assumed that the
metamaterial is composed by cubic SRR resonators, arranged in a cubic lattice.
The minimum symmetries needed to ensure an isotropic behavior are analyzed, and
some particular configurations are proposed. Besides, an equivalent circuit
model is proposed for the considered cubic SRR resonators. Experiments are
carried out in order to validate the proposed theory. We hope that this
analysis will pave the way to the design of bulk metamaterials with strong
isotropic magnetic response, including negative permeability and left-handed
metamaterials.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Cooling of molecules via free-space dissipative scattering of photons is
thought not to be practicable due to the inherently large number of Raman loss
channels available to molecules and the prohibitive expense of building
multiple repumping laser systems. The use of an optical cavity to enhance
coherent Rayleigh scattering into a decaying cavity mode has been suggested as
a potential method to mitigate Raman loss, thereby enabling the laser cooling
of molecules to ultracold temperatures. We discuss the possibility of
cavity-assisted laser cooling particles without closed transitions, identify
conditions necessary to achieve efficient cooling, and suggest solutions given
experimental constraints. Specifically, it is shown that cooperativities much
greater than unity are required for cooling without loss, and that this could
be achieved via the superradiant scattering associated with intracavity
self-localization of the molecules. Particular emphasis is given to the polar
hydroxyl radical (OH), cold samples of which are readily obtained from Stark
deceleration.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We derive general conditions for 100 percent frequency conversion in any
doubly resonant nonlinear cavity, for both second- and third-harmonic
generation via chi2 and chi3 nonlinearities. We find that conversion efficiency
is optimized for a certain critical power depending on the cavity parameters,
and assuming reasonable parameters we predict 100 percent conversion using
milliwatts of power or less. These results follow from a semi-analytical
coupled-mode theory framework which is generalized from previous work to
include both chi2 and chi3 media as well as inhomogeneous (fully vectorial)
cavities, analyzed in the high-efficiency limit where down-conversion processes
lead to a maximum efficiency at the critical power, and which is verified by
direct finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations of the nonlinear
Maxwell equations. Explicit formulas for the nonlinear coupling coefficients
are derived in terms of the linear cavity eigenmodes, which can be used to
design and evaluate cavities in arbitrary geometries.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The four Bell states can be represented by separable coherent states which
are products of individual non-hermitian spin operators. In the absence of
interactions, the non-hermitian states are predicted to form a new quantum
state of spin magnitude 1/sqrt(2) rather than 1/2. Properties of these states
show that an isolated spin is a resonance state with zero net angular momentum,
consistent with a point particle. In addition, the Bell states are shown to
take on the identical mathematical form when the two spins are bound (local) or
unbound (non-local). The bound Bell states are resonances between four states.
When the separate, they do so from only one of its resonance states and their
ensemble average defines the unbound Bell states. The bound and unbound Bell
states have the same mathematical form due to the persistence of the
rotationally invariance of sigma(1)dot sigma(2).

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.PS
Abstract: We demonstrate that rotating quasi-one-dimensional potentials, periodic or
parabolic, support solitons in settings where they are otherwise impossible.
Ground-state and vortex solitons are found in defocusing media, if the rotation
frequency exceeds a critical value. The revolving periodic potentials exhibit
the strongest stabilization capacity at a finite optimum value of their
strength, while the rotating parabolic trap features a very sharp transition to
stability with the increase of rotation frequency.

Categories: math.DS, cs.CV, math.ST, physics.ao-ph, stat.ME, stat.TH
Abstract: A new type of ensemble filter is proposed, which combines an ensemble Kalman
filter (EnKF) with the ideas of morphing and registration from image
processing. This results in filters suitable for nonlinear problems whose
solutions exhibit moving coherent features, such as thin interfaces in wildfire
modeling. The ensemble members are represented as the composition of one common
state with a spatial transformation, called registration mapping, plus a
residual. A fully automatic registration method is used that requires only
gridded data, so the features in the model state do not need to be identified
by the user. The morphing EnKF operates on a transformed state consisting of
the registration mapping and the residual. Essentially, the morphing EnKF uses
intermediate states obtained by morphing instead of linear combinations of the
states.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: The problems of stripper target behavior in the nonstationary intense
particle beams are considered. The historical sketch of studying of radiation
damage failure of carbon targets under ion bombardment is presented. The simple
model of evaporation of a target by an intensive pulsing beam is supposed.
Stripper foils lifetimes in the nonstationary intense particle can be described
by two failure mechanisms: radiation damage accumulation and evaporation of
target. At the maximal temperatures less than 2500K the radiation damage are
dominated; at temperatures above 2500K the mechanism of evaporation of a foil
prevails. The proposed approach has been applied to the discription of
behaviour of stripper foils in the BNL linac and SNS conditions.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: We measure the time dependence of the scintillator light-emission pulses in
NaI(Tl) crystals at different temperatures, after activation by gamma rays. We
confirm that there are two main nonexponential components to the time decay and
find that their amplitude ratio shows Arrhenius temperature dependence. We
explain these nonexponential components as arising from two competing
mechanisms of carrier transport to the Tl activation levels. The total light
output of the NaI(Tl) detectors shows a linear temperature dependence explained
by our model.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, astro-ph, hep-ph, nucl-th
Abstract: Review of recent works devoted to the variation of the fundamental constants
is presented including atomic clocks, quasar absorption spectra, and Oklo
natural nuclear reactor data. Assuming linear variation with time we can
compare different results. From the quasar absorption spectra:
  $\dot{\mu}/\mu=(1 \pm 3) \times 10^{-16}$ yr$^{-1}$. A combination of this
result and the atomic clock results gives the best limt on variation of
$\alpha$: $\dot{\alpha}/\alpha=(-0.8 \pm 0.8) \times 10^{-16}$ yr$^{-1}$. The
Oklo natural reactor gives the best limit on the variation of
$m_s/\Lambda_{QCD}$ where $m_s$ is the strange quark mass.
  Huge enhancement of the relative variation effects happens in transitions
between close atomic, molecular and nuclear energy levels. We suggest several
new cases where the levels are very narrow. Large enhancement of the variation
effects is also possible in cold atomic and molecular collisions near Feshbach
resonance. Massive bodies (stars or galaxies) can also affect physical
constants. They have large scalar charge $S$ proportional to number of
particles which produces a Coulomb-like scalar field $U=S/r$. This leads to a
variation of the fundamental constants proportional to the gravitational
potential, e.g. $\delta \alpha/ \alpha = k_\alpha \delta (GM/ r c^2)$. We
compare different manifestations of this effect.The strongest limit
  $k_\alpha +0.17 k_e= (-3.5\pm 6) \times 10^{-7}$.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This paper develops a cosmological hypothesis based on the following
propositions:
  1. Zero-point radiation derives from quantic fluctuations in space, and the
wavelength of its photons with the greatest energy is inversely proportional to
the curvature of space.
  2. The Universe began as the breaking in of photons of extremely high energy
contained in the 3-dimensional surface: $w^2+x^2+y^2+z^2=R^2_i$, whose radius
has continued to expand at the speed of ligth since its origin at $t=0$.
  3. The wavelength of the photons is quantized and the quantum of wavelength
is invariable.
  These propositions imply that the value of the total energy of the zero-point
radiation in the Universe remains constant and the condition $w^2 + x^2 + y^2 +
z^2 = (R_i + ct)^2 = R_u^2$ determines that every point in our space is subject
to a tension whose intensity $i$ is proportional to the curvature $1/R_u$. Any
increase of $R_u$ implies a decrease in $i$ and consequently an energy flow
which translates into an expansive force. Therefore, the Universe will expand
indefinitely: no Big Crunch is possible. If the initial radius of the Universe
$R_i$ has been smaller than the Schwarzschild radius, $R_s$, which corresponds
to the total mass of the Universe, $M_u$, the generation of matter would have
lasted for thousands of millions of years. Generation of matter over short
periods would have required values for $R_i$ of thousands of millions of light
years.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The Fokker-Planck Equation, applied to transport processes in fusion plasmas,
can model several anomalous features, including uphill transport, scaling of
confinement time with system size, and convective propagation of externally
induced perturbations. It can be justified for generic particle transport
provided that there is enough randomness in the Hamiltonian describing the
dynamics. Then, except for 1 degree-of-freedom, the two transport coefficients
are largely independent. Depending on the statistics of interest, the same
dynamical system may be found diffusive or dominated by its L\'{e}vy flights.

Categories: physics.atm-clus, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We consider Feshbach scattering of fermions in a one-dimensional optical
lattice. By formulating the scattering theory in the crystal momentum basis,
one can exploit the lattice symmetry and factorize the scattering problem in
terms of center-of-mass and relative momentum in the reduced Brillouin zone
scheme. Within a single band approximation, we can tune the position of a
Feshbach resonance with the center-of-mass momentum due to the non-parabolic
form of the energy band.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The Casimir force, which results from the confinement of the quantum
mechanical zero-point fluctuations of the electromagnetic fields, has received
significant attention in recent years for its effect on micro- and nano-scale
mechanical systems. With few exceptions, experimental observations have been
limited to conductive bodies interacting separated by vacuum or air. However,
interesting phenomena including repulsive forces are expected to exist in
certain circumstances between metals and dielectrics when the intervening
medium is not vacuum. In order to better understand the effect of the Casimir
force in such situations and to test the robustness of the generalized
Casimir-Lifshitz theory, we have performed the first precision measurements of
the Casimir force between two metals immersed in a fluid. For this situation,
the measured force is attractive and is approximately 80% smaller than the
force predicted by Casimir for ideal metals in vacuum. We present experimental
results and find them to be consistent with Lifshitz's theory.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: It is studied the MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm Database using a statistical
technique of analysis, that is based on the Wavelet and Hilbert Transforms.
With that technique, it was previously found, that there is a collective and
intrinsic dynamical behavior up to a scale of 64 heartbeats. Now it is shown,
that using the Biorthogonal wavelet bior3.1 such a behavior reaches the scale
1024. That result confirms, that the circulatory system is out of equilibrium.
According to the Statistical Mechanics of Tsallis, and a recent interpretation
of G. Wilk et al. respect to the non extensive parameter q, the healthy human
being is characterized by q=1.70+/-0.01.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: A comprehensive statistical model is developed for vertical profiles of the
horizontal wind and temperature throughout the troposphere based on
several-years radiosonde measurements of strong winds. The profiles measured
under quite different atmospheric conditions exhibit qualitative similarity. A
proper choice of the reference scales for the wind, temperature and altitude
levels allow us to consider the measurement data as realizations of a random
process with universal characteristics: means, the basic functions and
parameters of standard distributions for transform coefficients of the
Principal Component Analysis. The features of the atmospheric conditions are
described by statistical characteristics of the wind-temperature ensemble of
dimensional reference scales. The model can be useful for air pollution and
safety in high-risk areas such as chemical and nuclear plants.

Categories: hep-th, hep-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Knotted configurations supported by a Yang Mills fluid-field system are
suggested as a model for glueballs.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this comment it is pointed out that the electron velocity of the same
order as observed in graphene had been measured in GaAs submicron devices long
ago. Particle- antiparticle asymmetry related with electron and hole effective
masses in graphene seems puzzling as hole in a condensed matter system cannot
be treated as anti-electron. It is argued that there should be a universal
electrodynamics for QHE and superconductivity. In this context attention is
drawn to the new approach based on massless electron and the interpretation
that magnetic field represents angular momentum of the photon fluid.
Measurement of electron velocity in graphene and GaAs in parallel is suggested
for testing the massless electrodynamics.

Categories: q-bio.GN, cs.IT, math.IT, physics.bio-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: Molecular biology is a nanotechnology that works--it has worked for billions
of years and in an amazing variety of circumstances. At its core is a system
for acquiring, processing and communicating information that is universal, from
viruses and bacteria to human beings. Advances in genetics and experience in
designing computers have taken us to a stage where we can understand the
optimisation principles at the root of this system, from the availability of
basic building blocks to the execution of tasks. The languages of DNA and
proteins are argued to be the optimal solutions to the information processing
tasks they carry out. The analysis also suggests simpler predecessors to these
languages, and provides fascinating clues about their origin. Obviously, a
comprehensive unraveling of the puzzle of life would have a lot to say about
what we may design or convert ourselves into.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The Boussinesq equations for Rayleigh-Benard convection are simulated for a
cylindrical container with an aspect ratio near 1.5. The transition from an
axisymmetric stationary flow to time-dependent flows is studied using nonlinear
simulations, linear stability analysis and bifurcation theory. At a Rayleigh
number near 25,000, the axisymmetric flow becomes unstable to standing or
travelling azimuthal waves. The standing waves are slightly unstable to
travelling waves. This scenario is identified as a Hopf bifurcation in a system
with O(2) symmetry.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, math.DS
Abstract: Motivated by recent experimental and numerical studies of coherent structures
in wall-bounded shear flows, we initiate a systematic exploration of the
hierarchy of unstable invariant solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations. We
construct a dynamical, 10^5-dimensional state-space representation of plane
Couette flow at Re = 400 in a small, periodic cell and offer a new method of
visualizing invariant manifolds embedded in such high dimensions. We compute a
new equilibrium solution of plane Couette flow and the leading eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of known equilibria at this Reynolds number and cell size. What
emerges from global continuations of their unstable manifolds is a surprisingly
elegant dynamical-systems visualization of moderate-Reynolds turbulence. The
invariant manifolds tessellate the region of state space explored by
transiently turbulent dynamics with a rigid web of continuous and discrete
symmetry-induced heteroclinic connections.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Polymer Optical Fiber (POF) can be and are being used in various fields of
applications. Two of the main fields are the automotive and the home
entertainment sector. The POF can be applied in several different optical
communication systems as automotive multi-media busses or in-house Ethernet
systems.
  The requirements of bandwidth are increasing very fast in these sectors and
therefore solutions that satisfy these demands are of high actuality. One
solution is to use the wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) technique. Here,
several different wavelengths can carry information over one POF fiber. All
wavelengths that are transmitted over the fiber, must be separated at the
receiver to regain and redirect the information channels. These separators are
so-called Demultiplexers.
  There are several systems available on the market, which are all afflicted
with certain disadvantages. But all these solutions have one main disadvantage,
they are all too expensive for most of the applications mentioned above. So the
goal of this study is to develop an economical Demultiplexer for WDM
transmission over POF.
  The main idea is to separate the chromatic light in its monochromatic
components with the help of a prism with low reciprocal dispersive power. The
prism and the other assemblies, which are needed to adjust the optical path,
should be manufactured in injection molding technique. This manufacturing
technique is a very simple and economical way to produce a mass production
applicable Demultiplexer for POF.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The paper is concerned with dynamics of multi-phase media consisting of a
solid permeable material and a compressible Newtonian fluid. Governing
macroscopic equations are derived starting from the space-averaged microscopic
mass and momentum balances. The Reynolds stress models (i.e., momentum
dispersive fluxes) are discussed, and a suitable model is developed. In the
case of granular media the solid constituent is considered as an
elastic-plastic matrix, and the yield condition is approximated by Coulomb
friction law. It is revealed that the classical principle of maximum plastic
work is not, in general, valid for granular media, and an appropriate
variational principle is developed. This novel principle coincides with the
maximum plastic work principle for the case of cohesionless and free from
internal friction granular media.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In the present paper the realization of the obtained results in relation to
the dense high- temperature plasma of multivalent ions including experimental
data interpretation is discussed.

Categories: physics.data-an, q-bio.MN
Abstract: The problem of reconstructing and identifying intracellular protein signaling
and biochemical networks is of critical importance in biology today. We sought
to develop a mathematical approach to this problem using, as a test case, one
of the most well-studied and clinically important signaling networks in biology
today, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) driven signaling cascade.
More specifically, we suggest a method, augmented sparse reconstruction, for
the identification of links among nodes of ordinary differential equation (ODE)
networks from a small set of trajectories with different initial conditions.
Our method builds a system of representation by using a collection of integrals
of all given trajectories and by attenuating block of terms in the
representation itself. The system of representation is then augmented with
random vectors, and minimization of the 1-norm is used to find sparse
representations for the dynamical interactions of each node. Augmentation by
random vectors is crucial, since sparsity alone is not able to handle the large
error-in-variables in the representation. Augmented sparse reconstruction
allows to consider potentially very large spaces of models and it is able to
detect with high accuracy the few relevant links among nodes, even when
moderate noise is added to the measured trajectories. After showing the
performance of our method on a model of the EGFR protein network, we sketch
briefly the potential future therapeutic applications of this approach.

Categories: physics.ed-ph
Abstract: A small tabletop experiment for a direct measurement of the speed of light to
an accuracy of few percent is described. The experiment is accessible to a wide
spectrum of undergraduate students, in particular to students not majoring in
science or engineering. The experiment may further include a measurement of the
index of refraction of a sample. Details of the setup and equipment are given.
Results and limitations of the experiment are analyzed, partly based on our
experience in employing the experiment in our student laboratories. Safety
considerations are also discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We have calculated the atomic electric dipole moments (EDMs) d of ^3He and
^{171}Yb induced by their respective nuclear Schiff moments S. Our results are
d(He)= 8.3x10^{-5} and d(Yb)= -1.9 in units 10^{-17}S/(e{fm}^3)e cm. By
considering the nuclear Schiff moments induced by the parity and time-reversal
violating nucleon-nucleon interaction we find d(^{171}Yb)~0.6d(^{199}Hg). For
^3He the nuclear EDM coupled with the hyperfine interaction gives a larger
atomic EDM than the Schiff moment. The result for ^3He is required for a
neutron EDM experiment that is under development, where ^3He is used as a
comagnetometer. We find that the EDM for He is orders of magnitude smaller than
the neutron EDM. The result for Yb is needed for the planning and
interpretation of experiments that have been proposed to measure the EDM of
this atom.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The characteristics of a MeV ion source driven by superintense, ultrashort
laser pulses with circular polarization are studied by means of
particle-in-cell simulations. Predicted features include high efficiency, large
ion density, low divergence and the possibility of femtosecond duration. A
comparison with the case of linearly polarized pulses is made.

Categories: q-fin.TR, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Financial markets can be described on several time scales. We use data from
the limit order book of the London Stock Exchange (LSE) to compare how the
fluctuation dominated microstructure crosses over to a more systematic global
behavior.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, cond-mat.other, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present a suite of programs to determine the ground state of the
time-independent Gross-Pitaevskii equation, used in the simulation of
Bose-Einstein condensates. The calculation is based on the Optimal Damping
Algorithm, ensuring a fast convergence to the true ground state. Versions are
given for the one-, two-, and three-dimensional equation, using either a
spectral method, well suited for harmonic trapping potentials, or a spatial
grid.

Categories: q-fin.TR, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We analyze the dynamics of a forecasting game which exhibits the phenomenon
of information cascades. Each agent aims at correctly predicting a binary
variable and he/she can either look for independent information or herd on the
choice of others. We show that dynamics can be analitically described in terms
of a Langevin equation and its collective behavior is described by the solution
of a Kramers' problem. This provides very accurate results in the region where
the vast majority of agents herd, which corresponds to the most interesting one
from a game theoretic point of view.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: A new experimental set-up using a differential pressure transducer was
developed, that enables the monitoring of volume changes in cyclic triaxial
tests on unsaturated soils. Calibration tests were performed in order to
analyze the performance of the set-up, especially in terms of loading
frequencies. Based on calibration results, a low frequency of 0.05 Hz was
adopted for the tests carried out on the unsaturated loess from northern
France. Five water contents were considered in the tests. The obtained results
have confirmed the efficiency of the new system for volume change monitoring
under cyclic loading. The effect of water content on the cyclic behavior of
loess was clearly evidenced. Finally, some suggestions were made to improve the
accuracy of the system.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We consider the theory of the non-linear spectroscopy for a single molecule
undergoing stochastic dynamics and interacting with a sequence of two laser
pulses. General expressions for photon counting statistics are obtained, and an
exact solution to the problem of the Kubo-Anderson process is found. In the
limit of impulsive pulses the information on the photon statistics is contained
in the molecule's dipole correlation function. The selective limit where
temporal resolution is maintained, the semi-classical approximation and the
fast modulation limit exhibit general behaviors of this new type of
spectroscopy. We show how the design of the external field leads to rich
insights on dynamics of individual molecules which are different than those
found for an ensemble.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We develop a theoretical approach for the dynamics of Rydberg excitations in
ultracold gases, with a realistically large number of atoms. We rely on the
reduction of the single-atom Bloch equations to rate equations, which is
possible under various experimentally relevant conditions. Here, we explicitly
refer to a two-step excitation-scheme. We discuss the conditions under which
our approach is valid by comparing the results with the solution of the exact
quantum master equation for two interacting atoms. Concerning the emergence of
an excitation blockade in a Rydberg gas, our results are in qualitative
agreement with experiment. Possible sources of quantitative discrepancy are
carefully examined. Based on the two-step excitation scheme, we predict the
occurrence of an antiblockade effect and propose possible ways to detect this
excitation enhancement experimentally in an optical lattice as well as in the
gas phase.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We study the influence of the lattice topography and the coupling between
motion in different directions, for a three-dimensional Brownian motor based on
cold atoms in a double optical lattice. Due to controllable relative spatial
phases between the lattices, our Brownian motor can induce drifts in arbitrary
directions. Since the lattices couple the different directions, the relation
between the phase shifts and the directionality of the induced drift is non
trivial. Here is therefore this relation investigated experimentally by
systematically varying the relative spatial phase in two dimensions, while
monitoring the vertically induced drift and the temperature. A relative spatial
phase range of 2pi x 2pi is covered. We show that a drift, controllable both in
speed and direction, can be achieved, by varying the phase both parallel and
perpendicular to the direction of the measured induced drift. The experimental
results are qualitatively reproduced by numerical simulations of a simplified,
classical model of the system.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The interaction of two isotropic turbulent fields of equal integral scale but
different kinetic energy generates the simplest kind of inhomogeneous turbulent
field. In this paper we present a numerical experiment where two time decaying
isotropic fields of kinetic energies $E_1$ and $E_2$ initially match over a
narrow region. Within this region the kinetic energy varies as a hyperbolic
tangent. The following temporal evolution produces a shearless mixing. The
anisotropy and intermittency of velocity and velocity derivative statistics is
observed. In particular the asymptotic behavior in time and as a function of
the energy ratio $E_1/E_2 \to \infty$ is discussed. This limit corresponds to
the maximum observable turbulent energy gradient for a given $E_1$ and is
obtained through the limit $E_2 \to 0$. A field with $E_1/E_2 \to \infty$
represents a mixing which could be observed near a surface subject to a very
small velocity gradient separating two turbulent fields, one of which is nearly
quiescent. In this condition the turbulent penetration is maximum and reaches a
value equal to 1.2 times the nominal mixing layer width. The experiment shows
that the presence of a turbulent energy gradient is sufficient for the
appearance of intermittency and that during the mixing process the pressure
transport is not negligible with respect to the turbulent velocity transport.
These findings may open the way to the hypothesis that the presence of a
gradient of turbulent energy is the minimal requirement for Gaussian departure
in turbulence.

Categories: q-fin.ST, cond-mat.other, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In this paper we study the possible microscopic origin of heavy-tailed
probability density distributions for the price variation of financial
instruments. We extend the standard log-normal process to include another
random component in the so-called stochastic volatility models. We study these
models under an assumption, akin to the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, in
which the volatility has already relaxed to its equilibrium distribution and
acts as a background to the evolution of the price process. In this
approximation, we show that all models of stochastic volatility should exhibit
a scaling relation in the time lag of zero-drift modified log-returns. We
verify that the Dow-Jones Industrial Average index indeed follows this scaling.
We then focus on two popular stochastic volatility models, the Heston and
Hull-White models. In particular, we show that in the Hull-White model the
resulting probability distribution of log-returns in this approximation
corresponds to the Tsallis (t-Student) distribution. The Tsallis parameters are
given in terms of the microscopic stochastic volatility model. Finally, we show
that the log-returns for 30 years Dow Jones index data is well fitted by a
Tsallis distribution, obtaining the relevant parameters.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We consider a gas of hydrogen atoms illuminated by a broadband, unpolarized
radiation with zero anisotropy. In the absence of external fields, the atomic
J-levels are thus isotropically populated. While this condition persists in the
presence of a magnetic field, we show instead that electric fields can induce
the alignment of those levels. We also show that this electric alignment cannot
occur in a two-term model of hydrogen (e.g., if only the Ly-alpha transition is
excited), or if the level populations are distributed according to Boltzmann's
law.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Including Vaidya metric into the model of Expansive Nondecelerative Universe
allows to localize the energy of gravitational field. A term of effective
gravitational range is introduced and classic Newton potential is substituted
for Yukawa-type potential. It allows to allocate a typical frequency value to
each gravitational field. Derived theoretical conclusions led us to investigate
the effect of electromagnetic field with a precisely predetermined frequency
and intensity on iron. We believe that under certain circumstances a decrease
in iron gravitational mass should be observed. Two model experiments verifying
the theoretical conclusions are proposed.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: For some 100 years physics has modelled space and time via the spacetime
concept, with space being merely an observer dependent perspective effect of
that spacetime - space itself had no observer independent existence - it had no
ontological status, and it certainly had no dynamical description. In recent
years this has all changed. In 2002 it was discovered that a dynamical 3-space
had been detected many times, including the Michelson-Morley 1887 light-speed
anisotropy experiment. Here we review the dynamics of this 3-space, tracing its
evolution from that of an emergent phenomena in the information-theoretic
Process Physics to the phenomenological description in terms of a velocity
field describing the relative internal motion of the structured 3-space. The
new physics of the dynamical 3-space is extensively tested against experimental
and astronomical observations, including the necessary generalisation of the
Maxwell, Schrodinger and Dirac equations, leading to a derivation and
explanation of gravity as a refraction effect of quantum matter waves. The flat
and curved spacetime formalisms are derived from the new physics, so explaining
their apparent many successes.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.ins-det
Abstract: It is shown that multiple volume reflections from different planes of one
bent crystal becomes possible when particles move at a small angle with respect
to a crystal axis. Such a Multiple Volume Reflection makes it possible to
increase the particle deflection angle inside one crystal by more than four
times and can be used to increase the efficiency of beam extraction and
collimation at the LHC and many other accelerators.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, nlin.PS
Abstract: In some cases water droplets can completely wet micro-structured
superhydrophobic surfaces. The {\it dynamics} of this rapid process is analyzed
by ultra-high-speed imaging. Depending on the scales of the micro-structure,
the wetting fronts propagate smoothly and circularly or -- more interestingly
-- in a {\it stepwise} manner, leading to a growing {\it square-shaped} wetted
area: entering a new row perpendicular to the direction of front propagation
takes milliseconds, whereas once this has happened, the row itself fills in
microseconds ({\it ``zipping''})

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, cond-mat.other, physics.optics
Abstract: We study the interaction of an electromagnetic field with a non-absorbing or
absorbing dispersive sphere in the framework of complex angular momentum
techniques. We assume that the dielectric function of the sphere presents a
Drude-like behavior or an ionic crystal behavior modelling metallic and
semiconducting materials. We more particularly emphasize and interpret the
modifications induced in the resonance spectrum by absorption. We prove that
"resonant surface polariton modes" are generated by a unique surface wave,
i.e., a surface (plasmon or phonon) polariton, propagating close to the sphere
surface. This surface polariton corresponds to a particular Regge pole of the
electric part (TM) of the S matrix of the sphere. From the associated Regge
trajectory we can construct semiclassically the spectrum of the complex
frequencies of the resonant surface polariton modes which can be considered as
Breit-Wigner-type resonances. Furthermore, by taking into account the Stokes
phenomenon, we derive an asymptotic expression for the position in the complex
angular momentum plane of the surface polariton Regge pole. We then describe
semiclassically the surface polariton and provide analytical expressions for
its dispersion relation and its damping in the non-absorbing and absorbing
cases. In these analytic expressions, we more particularly exhibit
well-isolated terms directly linked to absorption. Finally, we explain why the
photon-sphere system can be considered as an artificial atom (a ``plasmonic
atom" or "phononic atom") and we briefly discuss the implication of our results
in the context of the Casimir effect.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: An analytical formula is obtained to describe the evolution of the average
populations of spin components of spin-1 atomic gases. The formula is derived
from the exact time-dependent solution of the Hamiltonian $H_{S}=c
mathbf{S}^{2}$ without using approximation. Therefore it goes beyond the mean
field theory and provides a general, accurate, and complete description for the
whole process of non-dissipative evolution starting from various initial
states. The numerical results directly given by the formula coincide
qualitatively well with existing experimental data, and also with other
theoretical results from solving dynamic differential equations. For some
special cases of initial state, instead of undergoing strong oscillation as
found previously, the evolution is found to go on very steadily in a very long
duration.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph, physics.med-ph
Abstract: We study theoretically the propagation of a step-modulated optical field as
it passes through a dispersive dielectric made up of a dilute collection of
oscillators characterized by a single narrow-band resonance. The propagated
field is given in terms of an integral of a Fourier type, which cannot be
evaluated even for simple models of the dispersive dielectric. The fact that
the oscillators have a low number density (dilute medium) and have a
narrow-band resonance allows us to simplify the integrand. In this case, the
integral can be evaluated exactly, although it is not possible using this
method to separate out the transient part of the propagated field known as
optical precursors. We also use an asymptotic method (saddle-point method) to
evaluate the integral. The contributions to the integral related to the
saddle-points of the integrand give rise to the optical precursors. We obtain
analytic expressions for the precursor fields and the domain over which the
asymptotic method is valid. When combined to obtain the total transient field,
we find that the agreement between the solutions obtained by the asymptotic and
the exact methods is excellent. Our results demonstrate that precursors can
persist for many nanoseconds and the chirp in the instantaneous frequency of
the precursors can manifest itself in beats in the transmitted intensity. Our
work strongly suggests that precursors have been observed in many previous
experiments.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: This paper considers a "striking outwards" reed coupled to a resonator. This
expression, due to Helmholtz, is not discussed here : it corresponds to the
most common model of a lip-type valve, when the valve is assumed to be a one
degree of freedom oscillator. The presented work is an extension of the works
done by Wilson and Beavers (1974), Tarnopolsky (2000). The range of the playing
frequencies is investigated. The first results are analytical : when no losses
are present in the resonator, it is proven that the ratio between the threshold
frequency and the reed resonance frequency is found to be necessarily within
the interval between unity and the square root of 3. This is a musical sixth.
Actually the interval is largely smaller, and this is in accordance with e.g.
the results by Cullen et al.. The smallest blowing pressure is found to be
directly related to the quality factor of the reed. Numerical results confirm
these statements, and are discussed in comparison with previous ones by Cullen
et al (2000).

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We present ultrafast optical switching experiments on 3D photonic band gap
crystals. Switching the Si inverse opal is achieved by optically exciting free
carriers by a two-photon process. We probe reflectivity in the frequency range
of second order Bragg diffraction where the photonic band gap is predicted. We
find good experimental switching conditions for free-carrier plasma frequencies
between 0.3 and 0.7 times the optical frequency: we thus observe a large
frequency shift of up to D omega/omega= 1.5% of all spectral features including
the peak that corresponds to the photonic band gap. We deduce a corresponding
large refractive index change of Dn'_Si/n'_Si= 2.0% and an induced absorption
length that is longer than the sample thickness. We observe a fast decay time
of 21 ps, which implies that switching could potentially be repeated at GHz
rates. Such a high switching rate is relevant to future switching and
modulation applications.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.ed-ph
Abstract: This paper offers an alternative approach to discussing both the principle of
relativity and the derivation of the Lorentz transformations. This approach
uses the idea that there may not be a preferred inertial frame through a
privileged access to information about events. In classroom discussions, it has
been my experience that this approach produces some lively arguments.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, astro-ph, hep-th, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: Year 2005 was the World Year of Physics, and it was commemorated worldwide as
the 100th anniversary of Albert Einstein's legendary works in which the
foundations of at least three areas of modern physics were laid: statistical
mechanics, quantum mechanics and special relativity. These works turned year
1905 in what deservedly was called the "miraculous year" (annus mirabilis) of
Einstein. However, the influence of this great mind was not limited to science.
As it is well known, his fingerprint remains engraved in many aspects of our
daily life. Because of that, in this work we have tried to cover almost all the
subjects in which Einstein was involved during the last century and, of course,
try and reveal the future projection his actions will have in this new century
that has just begun. Among the subjects covered in the volume one can find the
possible connection between Einstein and the artistic vanguard movement, his
religiosity, his days in Argentina, the Nobel Prize, the Einstein-Freud
correspondence, his pacifism and the nuclear energy, science and politics under
the Second Empire and the Weimar Republic, and even a description of his
patents and experiments, the studies performed to search for "built-in"
features in his brain and the doubts many had regarding whether Einstein was a
genius or a crank. Also included are essays on Einstein and Borges, philosophy
and relativity, Mach's principle, the relation among science, arts and
humanities, and, closer to Einstein's own theoretical research, the twin
paradox, chance and quantum mechanics, the arrow of time, gravitational lenses,
string theory, holography and black holes, gravitomagnetism, superconductivity,
gravitational waves, the photoelectric effect and the alternative theories for
gravitation.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.ao-ph, q-bio.PE
Abstract: Recently Supernova 2006gy was noted as the most luminous ever recorded, with
a total radiated energy of ~10^44 Joules. It was proposed that the progenitor
may have been a massive evolved star similar to eta Carinae, which resides in
our own galaxy at a distance of about 2.3 kpc. eta Carinae appears ready to
detonate. Although it is too distant to pose a serious threat as a normal
supernova, and given its rotation axis is unlikely to produce a Gamma-Ray Burst
oriented toward the Earth, eta Carinae is about 30,000 times nearer than
2006gy, and we re-evaluate it as a potential superluminous supernova. We find
that given the large ratio of emission in the optical to the X-ray, atmospheric
effects are negligible. Ionization of the atmosphere and concomitant ozone
depletion are unlikely to be important. Any cosmic ray effects should be spread
out over ~10^4 y, and similarly unlikely to produce any serious perturbation to
the biosphere. We also discuss a new possible effect of supernovae, endocrine
disruption induced by blue light near the peak of the optical spectrum. This is
a possibility for nearby supernovae at distances too large to be considered
"dangerous" for other reasons. However, due to reddening and extinction by the
interstellar medium, eta Carinae is unlikely to trigger such effects to any
significant degree.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: A method providing optimal estimate of probability density functions (PDFs)
from time series is proposed. It allows almost arbitrary resolution PDFs when
applied to either, sampled analytic functions or digitized data from
experiments. When results are compared with PDFs of the same data calculated
using the standard histogram method, a remarkable improvement is observed,
especially in far lateral regions of the PDF, where low probability events give
poor statistics.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We will look for an implementation of new symmetries in the space-time
structure and their cosmological implications. This search will allow us to
find a unified vision for electrodynamics and gravitation. We will attempt to
develop a heuristic model of the electromagnetic nature of the electron, so
that the influence of the gravitational field on the electrodynamics at very
large distances leads to a reformulation of our comprehension of the space-
time structure at quantum level through the elimination of the classical idea
of rest. This will lead us to a modification of the relativistic theory by
introducing the idea about a universal minimum limit of speed in the space-
time. Such a limit, unattainable by the particles, represents a preferred frame
associated with a universal background field (a vacuum energy), enabling a
fundamental understanding of the quantum uncertainties. The structure of
space-time becomes extended due to such a vacuum energy density, which leads to
a negative pressure at the cosmological scales as an anti-gravity, playing the
role of the cosmological constant. The tiny values of the vacuum energy density
and the cosmological constant will be successfully obtained, being in agreement
with current observational results.

Categories: q-bio.NC, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Recent in vitro data show that neurons respond to input variance with varying
sensitivities. Here, we demonstrate that Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) neurons can
operate in two computational regimes, one that is more sensitive to input
variance (differentiating) and one that is less sensitive (integrating). A
boundary plane in the 3D conductance space separates these two regimes. For a
reduced HH model, this plane can be derived analytically from the V nullcline,
thus suggesting a means of relating biophysical parameters to neural
computation by analyzing the neuron's dynamical system.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The analytic continuation methods of complex scaling (CS), smooth exterior
scaling (SES), and complex absorbing potential (CAP) are investigated for the
supercritical quasimolecular ground state in the U(92+)-Cf(98+) system at an
internuclear separation of R=20 fm. Pade approximants to the complex-energy
trajectories are used to perform an extrapolation of the resonance energies,
which, thus, become independent of the respective stabilization parameter.
Within the monopole approximation to the two-center potential is demonstrated
that the extrapolated results from SES and CAP are consistent to a high degree
of accuracy. Extrapolated CAP calculations are extended to include dipole and
quadrupole terms of the potential for a large range of internuclear separations
R. These terms cause a broadening of the widths at the permille level when the
nuclei are almost in contact, and at the % level for R values where the ground
state enters the negative continuum.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The largest failure of the old, Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum theory was with the
helium atom. It brought about the theory's demise. I show that this failure
does not originate, as commonly believed, with the orbit concept per se.
Instead, it was caused by the wrong choice of orbits, compounded by ignorance
of the exclusion principle. Choosing semiclassical electron oscillations
through the He nucleus, I calculate a singlet ground-state energy that rivals
in accuracy with quantum-mechanical results. The same method reveals Bohr's
historic energy value as the forbidden triplet ground state--a result beyond
the reach of quantum mechanics. At the qualitative level, the concept of
Coulomb oscillations visually explains the major features in the He double
spectrum in terms of crossed or parallel orbit orientation.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph, q-fin.ST
Abstract: Avalanches, or Avalanche-like, events are often observed in the dynamical
behaviour of many complex systems which span from solar flaring to the Earth's
crust dynamics and from traffic flows to financial markets. Self-organized
criticality (SOC) is one of the most popular theories able to explain this
intermittent charge/discharge behaviour. Despite a large amount of theoretical
work, empirical tests for SOC are still in their infancy. In the present paper
we address the common problem of revealing SOC from a simple time series
without having much information about the underlying system. As a working
example we use a modified version of the multifractal random walk originally
proposed as a model for the stock market dynamics. The study reveals, despite
the lack of the typical ingredients of SOC, an avalanche-like dynamics similar
to that of many physical systems. While, on one hand, the results confirm the
relevance of cascade models in representing turbulent-like phenomena, on the
other, they also raise the question about the current state of reliability of
SOC inference from time series analysis.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Euclidean space and linear algebra do not characterize dynamic electronic
orbitals satisfactorily for even the motion of both electrons in an inert
helium atom cannot be defined in reasonable details. Here the author puts
forward a novel two-dimensional spacetime model from scratch in the context of
defining both electrons in a helium atom. Space and time are treated as two
orthogonal, symmetric and complementary quantities under the atomic spacetime.
Electronic motion observed the rule of differential and integral operations
that were implemented by dynamic trigonometric functions. It is demonstrated
that the atomic spacetime is not a linear vector space with Newtonian time, and
within which calculus has non-classical definition, and complex wave functions
have fresh physical significances. This alternative approach is original,
informative and refreshing but still compatible with quantum mechanics in the
formulation. The description of electronic resonance in helium is also
comparable with classical mechanics such as an oscillating pendulum and with
classical electromagnetism such as an LC oscillator. The study has effectively
unified complex function, calculus, and trigonometry in mathematics, and
provided a prospect for unifying particle physics with classical physics on the
novel spacetime platform.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: Calculations are presented to demonstrate the feasibility of Moon shadow
observations for mean primary energies in the region 0.5-1.5 TeV using a muon
detector operating under the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan, Mexico. Due to
the small height of that monument (65 m), the experiment is capable of
providing considerably high statistics, although with reduced angular accuracy
for primary particle direction reconstruction. Our estimates are based on
simulations of muon production and transport in the atmosphere by CORSIKA and
along the body of the pyramid by GEANT4. The deflection of primaries in the
earth magnetic field is calculated using the IGRF model. The statistics for the
Moon shadow observations, which depends on different factors affecting the
accuracy of the primary particle direction reconstruction, are analyzed in
detail.

Categories: cond-mat.other, nucl-th, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We apply the general principles of effective field theories to the
construction of effective interactions suitable for few- and many-body
calculations in a no-core shell model framework. We calculate the spectrum of
systems with three and four two-component fermions in a harmonic trap. In the
unitary limit, we find that three-particle results are within 10% of known
semi-analytical values even in small model spaces. The method is very general,
and can be readily extended to other regimes, more particles, different species
(e.g., protons and neutrons in nuclear physics), or more-component fermions (as
well as bosons). As an illustration, we present calculations of the
lowest-energy three-fermion states away from the unitary limit and find a
possible inversion of parity in the ground state in the limit of trap size
large compared to the scattering length. Furthermore, we investigate the lowest
positive-parity states for four fermions, although we are limited by the
dimensions we can currently handle in this case.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In this article we discuss network growth based on Prisoner's Dilemma(PD)
where palyers on nodes in a network palay with its linked players. The players
estimate total profits in the PD. When a new node is attached, the node make
linkes to nodes in the network with the probabilities in proportion to the
profits made by the game. Iterating this process, a network grows. We
investigate properties of this type of growing networks, especially the degree
distribution and time-depending strategy distribution by running computer
simulation. We also find a sort of phase transition in the strategy
distributions. For these phenomena given by computer simulation, theoretical
studies are also carried out.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The redshift of galaxies is in general explained by the expansion of space.
The flat space time theory of gravitation suggests an additional
interpretation. In this theory gravitation is explained analogously to
Maxwell's theory on a flat space-time metric and gravitation is described by a
field (potentials) with which the proper time (atomic time) is defined. In
addition to the proper time in the universe, the oberserver's time is stated.
The oberserver's time interval is absolute whereas the interval of the proper
time is time dependent. In particular, atomic clocks at distant objects are
going slower than clocks at present. This explains the redshift of distant
objects without assuming an expanding universe.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: Art history linked some early 20th Century avant-garde visual art movements
to contemporary systems of ideas in mathematics and theoretical physics. One of
the proposed connections is the one that might have existed between Cubism and
Relativity, or more precisely, between Picasso and Einstein. The suggested
links are similarity (in a weak version) or identity (in a strong version) in
matters of space, time and simultaneity. It is possible, however, that these
supposed links of Einstein and avant-garde art movements were more the product
of the imagination of historians and critics, than the result of connections
between painters and scientists. On the one hand, the visual arts (in contrast
to music, as far as we now) were of no interest to Einstein, who, moreover, did
not seem inclined or knowledgeable enough to appreciate advanced forms. On the
other hand, Einstein's theories fell outside the artists' ken, let alone their
understanding, although there are firm clues pointing to the fact that
repercussions of those theories in the press and in literary circles could have
fired the imagination of some artists.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: Physics was in crisis at the beginning of the twentieth century because the
newborn Maxwell's electromagnetism defied mechanistic preconceptions. Albert
Einstein understood that the solution to the crisis required an audacious
reworking of the concepts of space and time. Special Relativity deeply modified
our way of regarding space and time, in order to harmonize electromagnetism
with the principle of relativity. As a consequence, lengths and elapsed times
were stripped of the invariant character that classical Physics conferred them;
in their place, the speed of light acquired that privileged status. Such
revolutionary change forced Einstein to reformulate Newtonian mechanics, a step
that led him to discover the mass-energy equivalence.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: Background and Purpose: Percutaneous renal access in the context of
percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) is a difficult technique, requiring rapid
and precise access to a particular calix. We present a computerized system
designed to improve percutaneous renal access by projecting the ultrasound
puncture tract onto fluoroscopic images. Materials and Methods: The system
consists of a computer and a localizer allowing spatial localization of the
position of the various instruments. Without any human intervention, the
ultrasound nephrostomy tract is superimposed in real time onto fluoroscopic
images acquired in various views. Results: We tested our approach by laboratory
experiments on a phantom. Also, after approval by our institution's Ethics
Committee, we validated this technique in the operating room during PCNL in one
patient. Conclusion: Our system is reliable, and the absence of
image-processing procedures makes it robust. We have initiated a prospective
study to validate this technique both for PCNL specialists and as a learning
tool.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Invasiveness, one of the hallmarks of tumor progression, represents the
tumor's ability to expand into the host tissue by means of several complex
biochemical and biomechanical processes. Since certain aspects of the problem
present a striking resemblance with well known physical mechanisms, such as the
mechanical insertion of a solid inclusion in an elastic material specimen [1,
2] or a water drop impinging on a surface [3], we propose here an analogy
between these physical processes and a cancer system's invasive branching into
the surrounding tissue. Accounting for its solid and viscous properties, we
present a unifying concept that the tumor behaves as a granular solid. While
our model has been explicitly formulated for multicellular tumor spheroids in
vitro, it should also contribute to a better understanding of tumor invasion in
vivo.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: A theoretical study of the energy distribution function of the negative
hydrogen ion H- in typical conditions for multicusp ion sources is presented.
The case of H/H2 mixture is studied by a Monte Carlo solution of the kinetic
equation for H- transport. A simple analytical model is obtained for the case
of a fully dissociated H plasma and uniform reduced electric field (E/N).
Results are in good agreement with the two-group distribution deduced from
laser photodetachment experiments and explain the low energy group as an effect
of the charge exchange collisions of negative ions with H atoms.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present results of the first-principles calculation of Cs dipole static
polarizabilities for the Ns (N = 6 - 12), Np_j (N = 6 - 10), and Nd_j (N = 5 -
10) states using the relativistic all-order method. In our implementation of
the all-order method, single and double excitations of Dirac-Fock wave
functions are included to all orders in perturbation theory. Additional
calculations are carried out for the dominant terms and the uncertainties of
our final values are estimated for all states. A comprehensive review of the
existing theoretical and experimental studies of the Cs polarizabilities is
also carried out. Our results are compared with other values where they are
available. These calculations provide a theoretical benchmark for a large
number of Cs polarizabilities.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: A proof-of-principle electron electric dipole moment (e-EDM) experiment using
slow cesium atoms, nulled magnetic fields, and electric field quantization has
been performed. With the ambient magnetic fields seen by the atoms reduced to
less than 200 pT, an electric field of 6 MV/m lifts the degeneracy between
states of unequal mF and, along with the low (approximately 3 m/s) velocity,
suppresses the systematic effect from the motional magnetic field. The low
velocity and small residual magnetic field have made it possible to induce
transitions between states and to perform state preparation, analysis, and
detection in regions free of applied static magnetic and electric fields. This
experiment demonstrates techniques that may be used to improve the e-EDM limit
by two orders of magnitude, but it is not in itself a sensitive e-EDM search,
mostly due to limitations of the laser system.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: With his General Theory of Relativity, Albert Einstein produced a revolution
in our conception of reality and of the knowledge we can obtain from it. This
revolution can be viewed from philosophy as leading to one of the great
paradigms in the history of thought which, together with the Aristotelian and
the Newtonian paradigms, embodied the different ways of conceiving the universe
and our access to it. The comparison among these three paradigms allows us to
understand how the human being has progressively lost his central place in the
cosmos, not only in physical terms, but also in an epistemic sense, regarding
his power of knowledge about reality.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Community structure represents the local organization of complex networks and
the single most important feature to extract functional relationships between
nodes. In the last years, the problem of community detection has been
reformulated in terms of the optimization of a function, the Newman-Girvan
modularity, that is supposed to express the quality of the partitions of a
network into communities. Starting from a recent critical survey on modularity
optimization, pointing out the existence of a resolution limit that poses
severe limits to its applicability, we discuss the general issue of the use of
quality functions in community detection. Our main conclusion is that quality
functions are useful to compare partitions with the same number of modules,
whereas the comparison of partitions with different numbers of modules is not
straightforward and may lead to ambiguities.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: Albert Einstein made fundamental contributions to the development of quantum
mechanics. However, he was never satisfied with the quantum worldview. In fact,
during most of his life he attempted to find inconsistencies and paradoxes
within quantum mechanics. His famous quote "God does not play dice" shows how
disturbing was to Einstein one of the most important aspects of quantum
mechanics: non-determinism. In this paper we will present the basic concepts of
quantum mechanics, we will describe Einstein's attempts to destroy it and we
will discuss why we can nowadays state that, in this regard, Albert Einstein
was not right.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Equation for evolution of the four-component Stokes vector in weakly
anisotropic and smoothly inhomogeneous media is derived on the basis of
quasi-isotropic approximation of the geometrical optics method, which provides
consequent asymptotic solution of Maxwell equations. Our equation generalizes
previous results, obtained for the normal propagation of electromagnetic waves
in stratified media. It is valid for curvilinear rays with torsion and is
capable to describe normal modes conversion in the inhomogeneous media.
Remarkably, evolution of the Stokes vector is described by the
Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi equation for relativistic spin precession, whereas the
equation for the three-component Stokes vector resembles the Landau-Lifshitz
equation for spin precession in ferromegnetic systems. General theory is
applied for analysis of polarization evolution in a magnetized plasma. We also
emphasize fundamental features of the non-Abelian polarization evolution in
anisotropic inhomogeneous media and illustrate them by simple examples.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Quantum mechanics (QM) clearly violates Newton's First Law of Motion (NFLM)
in the quantum domain for one of the simplest problems, yielding an effect in a
force-free region much like the Aharonov-Bohm effect. In addition, there is an
incompatibility between the predictions of QM in the classical limit, and that
of classical mechanics (CM) with respect to NFLM. A general argument is made
that such a disparity may be found commonly for a wide variety of quantum
predictions in the classical limit. Alternatives to the Schrodinger equation
are considered that might avoid this problem. The meaning of the classical
limit is examined. Critical views regarding QM by Schrodinger, Bohm, Bell,
Clauser, and others are presented to provide a more complete perspective.

Categories: stat.ME, cs.LG, math.ST, physics.soc-ph, stat.ML, stat.TH
Abstract: Observations consisting of measurements on relationships for pairs of objects
arise in many settings, such as protein interaction and gene regulatory
networks, collections of author-recipient email, and social networks. Analyzing
such data with probabilisic models can be delicate because the simple
exchangeability assumptions underlying many boilerplate models no longer hold.
In this paper, we describe a latent variable model of such data called the
mixed membership stochastic blockmodel. This model extends blockmodels for
relational data to ones which capture mixed membership latent relational
structure, thus providing an object-specific low-dimensional representation. We
develop a general variational inference algorithm for fast approximate
posterior inference. We explore applications to social and protein interaction
networks.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.atom-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The volume capture in classical relativistic mechanics is considered as a
scattering process for the high energy charged particles in a field with no
central or mirror symmetry. The parameters of volume capture for potentials
with smooth variable curvature are received and analyzed.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In the context of two-dimensional spacetime within a helium atom, both 1s
electrons are characterized by wave functions that observe duality equation.
They are symmetric, orthogonal and interwoven, forming a dynamic rope structure
at any moment. Instead of elliptical orbit of planets around the sun,
electronic orbitals take the form of matter state transformation cycle. While
the kinematic movement of planets is governed by Kepler's first law, electronic
transformation obeys Pythagorean theorem, both being equivalent in physical
principle. The atomic spacetime is a continuous medium of electron clouds in
synchronized differential and integral processes that are implemented by smooth
trigonometry. In order to integrate this new approach with conventional
physics, the author translates the pattern of electronic motion in the atomic
spacetime into spherical volume undulation in Euclidean geometry and calculates
the probability density of an electron within the sphere from the classical
perspective. From the primary wave function of a 1s electron, the author also
tries to derive the mathematical expression of central force that guides the
surrounding bodies along the orbits. The result is exciting and surprising that
questions the exactness of the venerable Coulomb's law.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The quantitative description of the orthopositronium anomalies ("isotope
anomaly" in a gaseous neon for the "resonance conditions" and
"lambda{T}-anomaly" in non-resonance conditions) is possible on the basis of a
hypothesis about restoration of spontaneously broken complete relativity
(A.F.Andreev, 1982) of the limited space-time "volume" ("defect" of the
space-time) in a final state of the beta{+}-decay of nucleus such as Na-22,
Ga-68, etc. This addition of the Standard Model in a final state of the
topological quantum transition (non-steady-state, a generalized displacement
current) supposes the description on the common basis timelike fundamental
particles (locality) and spacelike fundamental structure (non-locality without
causal paradoxes). One of achievements of expansion of Standard Model can be a
substantiation of topological connection e-mu-tau-Universality with discrete
structure (quantization) "defect" of the space-time.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We investigate the dynamics of a relativistic electron in a strongly
nonlinear plasma wave in terms of classical mechanics by taking into account
the action of the radiative reaction force. The two limiting cases are
considered. In the first case where the energy of the accelerated electrons is
low, the electron makes many betatron oscillations during the acceleration. In
the second case where the energy of the accelerated electrons is high, the
betatron oscillation period is longer than the electron residence time in the
accelerating phase. We show that the force of radiative friction can severely
limit the rate of electron acceleration in a plasma accelerator.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present a compact $^{87}$Rb atomic source for high precision dual atom
interferometers. The source is based on a double-stage magneto-optical trap
(MOT) design, consisting of a 2-dimensional (2D)-MOT for efficient loading of a
3D-MOT. The accumulated atoms are precisely launched in a horizontal moving
molasses. Our setup generates a high atomic flux ($>10^{10}$ atoms/s) with
precise and flexibly tunable atomic trajectories as required for high
resolution Sagnac atom interferometry. We characterize the performance of the
source with respect to the relevant parameters of the launched atoms, i.e.
temperature, absolute velocity and pointing, by utilizing time-of-flight
techniques and velocity selective Raman transitions.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Critically growing problems of fundamental science organisation and content
are analysed with examples from physics and emerging interdisciplinary fields.
Their origin is specified and new science structure (organisation and content)
is proposed as a unified solution.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: We discuss two separate techniques for Kalman Filtering in the presence of
state space equality constraints. We then prove that despite the lack of
similarity in their formulations, under certain conditions, the two methods
result in mathematically equivalent constrained estimate structures. We
conclude that the potential benefits of using equality constraints in Kalman
Filtering often outweigh the computational costs, and as such, equality
constraints, when present, should be enforced by way of one of these two
methods.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The nature of changes in the interference pattern caused by the presence of
polarization-changing elements in one or both beams of an interferometer, in
particular those caused by an effective optical activity due to passage of a
polarized beam through a coiled optical fiber are clarified. It is pointed out
that for an incident state that is not circularly polarized so that the two
interfering beams go to different polarization states, there is an observable
nonzero Pancharatnam phase shift between them which depends on the incident
polarization state and on the solid angle subtended by the track of the
$\vec{k}$-vector at the centre of the sphere of k-vectors. The behaviour of
this phase shift is singular when the two interfering states are nearly
orthogonal. It is shown that for zero path difference between the two beams,
the amplitude of intensity modulation as a function of optical activity is
independent of the incident polarization state.

Categories: nlin.CD, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In this Letter we suggest a simple and physically transparent analytical
model of the pressure driven turbulent wall-bounded flows at high but finite
Reynolds numbers Re. The model gives accurate qualitative description of the
profiles of the mean-velocity and Reynolds-stresses (second order correlations
of velocity fluctuations) throughout the entire channel or pipe in the wide
range of Re, using only three Re-independent parameters. The model sheds light
on the long-standing controversy between supporters of the century-old log-law
theory of von-K\`arm\`an and Prandtl and proposers of a newer theory promoting
power laws to describe the intermediate region of the mean velocity profile.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Shear localization in an aqueous clay suspension of Laponite is investigated
through dynamic light scattering, which provides access both to the dynamics of
the system (homodyne mode) and to the local velocity profile (heterodyne mode).
When the shear bands form, a relaxation of the dynamics typical of a gel phase
is observed in the unsheared band soon after flow stop, suggesting that an
arrested dynamics is present during the shear localization regime. Periodic
oscillations of the flow behavior, typical of a stick-slip phenomenon, are also
observed when shear localization occurs. Both results are discussed in the
light of various theoretical models for soft glassy materials.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We study general aspects of active motion with fluctuations in the speed and
the direction of motion in two dimensions. We consider the case in which
fluctuations in the speed are not correlated to fluctuations in the direction
of motion, and assume that both processes can be described by independent
characteristic time-scales. We show the occurrence of a complex transient that
can exhibit a series of alternating regimes of motion, for two different
angular dynamics which correspond to persistent and directed random walks. We
also show additive corrections to the diffusion coefficient. The characteristic
time-scales are also exposed in the velocity autocorrelation, which is a sum of
exponential forms.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Biology is considered here as an "emergent science" in the sense of Anderson
and of Laughlin and Pines. It is demonstrated that a straightforward
mathematical definition of "biological system" is useful in showing how biology
differs in structure from the lower levels in Anderson's "More is Different"
hierarchy. Using cells in a chemostat as a paradigmatic exemplar of a
biological system, it is found that a coherent collection of metabolic pathways
through a single cell in the chemostat also satisfies the proposed definition
of a biological system. This provides a theoretical and mathematical
underpinning for Young's fundamental model of biological organization and
integration. Evidence for the therapeutic efficacy of Young's method of
analysis is provided by preliminary results of clinical trials of a specific
application of Young's model to the treatment of cancer cachexia.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, math-ph, math.MP, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.QM
Abstract: This review presents the elastic theory of low-dimensional (one- and
two-dimensional) continua and its applications in bio- and nano-structures.
First, the curve and surface theory, as the geometric representation of the
low-dimensional continua, is briefly described through Cartan moving frame
method. The elastic theory of Kirchhoff rod, Helfrich rod, bending-soften rod,
fluid membrane, and solid shell is revisited. Secondly, the application and
availability of the elastic theory of low-dimensional continua in
bio-structures, including short DNA rings, lipid membranes, and cell membranes,
are discussed. The kink stability of short DNA rings is addressed by using the
theory of Kirchhoff rod, Helfrich rod, and bending-soften rod. The lipid
membranes obey the theory of fluid membrane. A cell membrane is simplified as a
composite shell of lipid bilayer and membrane skeleton, which is a little
similar to the solid shell. It is found that the membrane skeleton enhances
highly the mechanical stability of cell membranes. Thirdly, the application and
availability of the elastic theory of low-dimensional continua in
nano-structures, including graphene and carbon nanotubes, are discussed. A
revised Lenosky lattice model is proposed based on the local density
approximation. Its continuum form up to the second order terms of curvatures
and strains is the same as the free energy of 2D solid shells. Several typical
mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes are revisited and investigated based
on this continuum form. It is possible to avoid introducing the controversial
concepts, the Young's modulus and thickness of graphene and single-walled
carbon nanotubes, with this continuum form.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: One of the less known facets of Ludwig Boltzmann was that of an advocate of
Aviation, one of the most challenging technological problems of his times.
Boltzmann followed closely the studies of pioneers like Otto Lilienthal in
Berlin, and during a lecture on a prestigious conference he vehemently defended
further investments in the area. In this article I discuss his involvement with
Aviation, his role in its development and his correspondence with two flight
pioneers, Otto Lilienthal e Wilhelm Kress.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The motion of particles, where the particles: electrons, ions in microtubules
or migrated peoples can be described as the superposition of diffusion and
ordered waves. In this paper it is shown that the master equation for transport
processes can be formulated as the time delayed hyperbolic partial equation.
The equation describes the processes with memory. For characteristic times
shorter than the relaxation time the master equation is the generalized Klein -
Gordon equation.
  Key words: hyperbolic transport, microtubules, heat waves, Neolithic
migration

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech
Abstract: In this paper we examine a number of methods for probing and understanding
the large-scale structure of networks that evolve over time. We focus in
particular on citation networks, networks of references between documents such
as papers, patents, or court cases. We describe three different methods of
analysis, one based on an expectation-maximization algorithm, one based on
modularity optimization, and one based on eigenvector centrality. Using the
network of citations between opinions of the United States Supreme Court as an
example, we demonstrate how each of these methods can reveal significant
structural divisions in the network, and how, ultimately, the combination of
all three can help us develop a coherent overall picture of the network's
shape.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We study a modified version of a model previously proposed by Jackson and
Wolinsky to account for communicating information and allocating goods in
socioeconomic networks. In the model, the utility function of each node is
given by a weighted sum of contributions from all accessible nodes. The
weights, parameterized by the variable $\delta$, decrease with distance. We
introduce a growth mechanism where new nodes attach to the existing network
preferentially by utility. By increasing $\delta$, the network structure
evolves from a power-law to an exponential degree distribution, passing through
a regime characterised by shorter average path length, lower degree
assortativity and higher central point dominance. In the second part of the
paper we compare different network structures in terms of the average utility
received by each node. We show that power-law networks provide higher average
utility than Poisson random networks. This provides a possible justification
for the ubiquitousness of scale-free networks in the real world.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: we report an ultrafast synchrotron x-ray phase contrast imaging study of the
primary breakup mechanism of a coaxial air-assisted water jet. We demonstrate
that there exist great similarities in the phenomenology of primary breakup
with that of the secondary breakup. Especially, a membrane-mediated breakup
mechanism dominates the breakup process for a wide range of air speeds. This
finding reveals the intrinsic connections of these two breakup regimes and has
deep implications on the unified theoretical approach in treating the breakup
mechanism of high speed liquid jet.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Both the highest- and the linear temperature dependence of the resistivity in
wide temperature range appear at the optimally doped regions of Cu-based
superconductors1,2,3,4,5, and the highest- of Fe-based superconductors6,7 are
also associated with the linear temperature dependence of the resistivity in
normal states near superconducting states. This means that the high temperature
superconductivity and the linear temperature dependence of the resistivity
should be dominated by the same mechanism. This letter on theoretic calculation
clearly shows that strong spin-charge correlation dominated resistivity behaves
the linear temperature dependence, thus high-temperature superconductivity
should be induced by strong spin-charge correlation.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.other, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We propose a method for quantum state transfer from one atom laser beam to
another via an intermediate optical field, using Raman incoupling and
outcoupling techniques. Our proposal utilises existing experimental
technologies to teleport macroscopic matter waves over potentially large
distances without shared entanglement.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The hypothesis concerning the off-site continuum existence is investigated
from the point of view of the mathematical theory of sets. The principles and
methods of the mathematical description of the physical objects from different
off-site continuums are introduced and discussed. There are also proposed the
mathematical methods of the description of the off-site continuum observable
structures and the visual perception of its physical objects from the continuum
of the observer.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: This article consists of a brief discussion of the energy density over time
or frequency that is obtained with the wavelet transform. Also an efficient
algorithm is suggested to calculate the continuous transform with the Morlet
wavelet. The energy values of the Wavelet transform are compared with the power
spectrum of the Fourier transform. Useful definitions for power spectra are
given. The focus of the work is on simple measures to evaluate the transform
with the Morlet wavelet in an efficient way. The use of the transform and the
defined values is shown in some examples.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We simulate the prisoner's dilemma and hawk-dove games on a real social
acquaintance network. Using a discrete analogue of replicator dynamics, we show
that surprisingly high levels of cooperation can be achieved, contrary to what
happens in unstructured mixing populations. Moreover, we empirically show that
cooperation in this network is stable with respect to invasion by defectors.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The paper summarizes our latest progress in the development of newly
introduced micro pattern gaseous detectors with resistive electrodes. These
resistive electrodes protect the detector and the front-end electronics in case
of occasional discharges and thus make the detectors very robust and reliable
in operation. As an example, we describe in greater detail a new recently
developed GEM-like detector, fully spark-protected with electrodes made of
resistive kapton. We discovered that all resistive layers used in these studies
(including kapton), that are coated with photosensitive layers, such as CsI,
can be used as efficient photo cathodes for detectors operating in a pulse
counting mode. We describe the first applications of such detectors combined
with CsI or SbCs photo cathodes for the detection of UV photons at room and
cryogenic temperatures.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We present an experimental study of the intrinsic magnetometric sensitivity
of an optical/rf-frequency double resonance magnetometer in which linearly
polarized laser light is used in the optical pumping and detection processes.
We show that a semi-empirical model of the magnetometer can be used to describe
the magnetic resonance spectra. Then, we present an efficient method to predict
the optimum operating point of the magnetometer, i.e., the light power and rf
Rabi frequency providing maximum magnetometric sensitivity. Finally, we apply
the method to investigate the evolution of the optimum operating point with
temperature. The method is very efficient to determine relaxation rates and
thus allowed us to determine the three collisional disalignment cross sections
for the components of the alignment tensor. Both first and second harmonic
signals from the magnetometer are considered and compared.

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.CD
Abstract: We study light emission patterns from stadium-shaped semiconductor (GaAs)
microcavity lasers theoretically and experimentally. Performing systematic wave
calculations for passive cavity modes, we demonstrate that the averaging by
low-loss modes, such as those realized in multi-mode lasing, generates an
emission pattern in good agreement with the ray model's prediction. In
addition, we show that the dependence of experimental far-field emission
patterns on the aspect ratio of the stadium cavity is well reproduced by the
ray model.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: A detailed description of an original method used to measure the luminosity
accumulated by the HERA-B experiment for a data sample taken during the
2002-2003 HERA running period is reported. We show that, with this method, a
total luminosity measurement can be achieved with a typical precision,
including overall systematic uncertainties, at a level of 5% or better. We also
report evidence for the detection of delta-rays generated in the target and
comment on the possible use of such delta rays to measure luminosity.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Howard Brenner has recently proposed modifications to the Navier-Stokes
equations that relate to a diffusion of fluid volume that would be significant
for flows with high density gradients. In a previous paper (Greenshields &
Reese, 2007), we found these modifications gave good predictions of the viscous
structure of shock waves in argon in the range Mach 1.0-12.0 (while
conventional Navier-Stokes equations are known to fail above about Mach 2).
However, some areas of concern with this model were a somewhat arbitrary choice
of modelling coefficient, and potentially unphysical and unstable solutions. In
this paper, we therefore present slightly different modifications to include
molecule mass diffusion fully in the Navier-Stokes equations. These
modifications are shown to be stable and produce physical solutions to the
shock problem of a quality broadly similar to those from the family of extended
hydrodynamic models that includes the Burnett equations. The modifications
primarily add a diffusion term to the mass conservation equation, so are at
least as simple to solve as the Navier-Stokes equations; there are none of the
numerical implementation problems of conventional extended hydrodynamics
models, particularly in respect of boundary conditions. We recommend further
investigation and testing on a number of different benchmark non-equilibrium
flow cases.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.bio-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: We present a mathematical framework (referred to as Context-driven
Actualization of Potential, or CAP) for describing how entities change over
time under the influence of a context. The approach facilitates comparison of
change of state of entities studied in different disciplines. Processes are
seen to differ according to the degree of nondeterminism, and the degree to
which they are sensitive to, internalize, and depend upon a particular context.
Our analysis suggests that the dynamical evolution of a quantum entity
described by the Schrodinger equation is not fundamentally different from
change provoked by a measurement often referred to as collapse, but a limiting
case, with only one way to collapse. The biological transition to coded
replication is seen as a means of preserving structure in the fact of
context-driven change, and sextual replication as a means of increasing
potentiality thus enhancing diversity through interaction with context. The
framework sheds light on concepts like selection and fitness, reveals how
exceptional Darwinian evolution is as a means of 'change of state', and
clarifies in what sense culture, and the creative process underlying it, are
Darwinian.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph, q-fin.ST
Abstract: We show that the Kullback-Leibler distance is a good measure of the
statistical uncertainty of correlation matrices estimated by using a finite set
of data. For correlation matrices of multivariate Gaussian variables we
analytically determine the expected values of the Kullback-Leibler distance of
a sample correlation matrix from a reference model and we show that the
expected values are known also when the specific model is unknown. We propose
to make use of the Kullback-Leibler distance to estimate the information
extracted from a correlation matrix by correlation filtering procedures. We
also show how to use this distance to measure the stability of filtering
procedures with respect to statistical uncertainty. We explain the
effectiveness of our method by comparing four filtering procedures, two of them
being based on spectral analysis and the other two on hierarchical clustering.
We compare these techniques as applied both to simulations of factor models and
empirical data. We investigate the ability of these filtering procedures in
recovering the correlation matrix of models from simulations. We discuss such
an ability in terms of both the heterogeneity of model parameters and the
length of data series. We also show that the two spectral techniques are
typically more informative about the sample correlation matrix than techniques
based on hierarchical clustering, whereas the latter are more stable with
respect to statistical uncertainty.

Categories: nlin.PS, physics.optics
Abstract: We suggest an annular waveguide coupler for switching the angular momentum of
light. We study linear and nonlinear coupling of both power and momentum of an
optical vortex beam launched into one of the ring cores, and demonstrate that
the switching takes place well below the collapse threshold. The switching is
more effective for the inner-ring excitation since it triggers more sharply and
for the lower power enough to avoid the beam azimuthal instability.

Categories: q-bio.BM, physics.bio-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: A coarse-grained variational model is used to investigate the polymer
dynamics of barrier crossing for a diverse set of two-state folding proteins.
The model gives reliable folding rate predictions provided excluded volume
terms that induce minor structural cooperativity are included in the
interaction potential. In general, the cooperative folding routes have sharper
interfaces between folded and unfolded regions of the folding nucleus and
higher free energy barriers. The calculated free energy barriers are strongly
correlated with native topology as characterized by contact order. Increasing
the rigidity of the folding nucleus changes the local structure of the
transition state ensemble non-uniformly across the set of protein studied.
Neverthless, the calculated prefactors k0 are found to be relatively uniform
across the protein set, with variation in 1/k0 less than a factor of five. This
direct calculation justifies the common assumption that the prefactor is
roughly the same for all small two-state folding proteins. Using the barrier
heights obtained from the model and the best fit monomer relaxation time 30ns,
we find that 1/k0 (1-5)us (with average 1/k0 4us). This model can be extended
to study subtle aspects of folding such as the variation of the folding rate
with stability or solvent viscosity, and the onset of downhill folding.

Categories: physics.ao-ph
Abstract: Most ocean models in current use are built upon structured meshes. It follows
that most existing tools for extracting diagnostic quantities (volume and
surface integrals, for example) from ocean model output are constructed using
techniques and software tools which assume structured meshes. The greater
complexity inherent in unstructured meshes (especially fully unstructured grids
which are unstructured in the vertical as well as the horizontal direction) has
left some oceanographers, accustomed to traditional methods, unclear on how to
calculate diagnostics on these meshes. In this paper we show that tools for
extracting diagnostic data from the new generation of unstructured ocean models
can be constructed with relative ease using open source software. Higher level
languages such as Python, in conjunction with packages such as NumPy, SciPy,
VTK and MayaVi, provide many of the high-level primitives needed to perform 3D
visualisation and evaluate diagnostic quantities, e.g. density fluxes. We
demonstrate this in the particular case of calculating flux of vector fields
through isosurfaces, using flow data obtained from the unstructured mesh finite
element ocean code ICOM, however this tool can be applied to model output from
any unstructured grid ocean code.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We find that a field with oscillations of matter in proper time has the
properties of a zero-spin bosonic field. A particle observed in this field is a
proper time oscillator. Neglecting all quantum effects, a proper time
oscillator can mimic a point mass at rest in general relativity. The spacetime
outside a 'stationary' proper time oscillator is a Schwarzschild field.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We report an Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) study on thick multi lamellar
stacks of approx. 10 mum thickness (about 1500 stacked membranes) of DMPC
(1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phoshatidylcholine) deposited on silicon wafers.
These thick stacks could be stabilized for measurements under excess water or
solution. From force curves we determine the compressional modulus B and the
rupture force F_r of the bilayers in the gel (ripple), the fluid phase and in
the range of critical swelling close to the main transition. AFM allows to
measure the compressional modulus of stacked membrane systems and values for B
compare well to values reported in the literature. We observe pronounced
ripples on the top layer in the Pbeta' (ripple) phase and find an increasing
ripple period Lambda_r when approaching the temperature of the main phase
transition into the fluid Lalpha phase at about 24 C. Metastable ripples with
2Lambda_r are observed. Lambda_r also increases with increasing osmotic
pressure, i.e., for different concentrations of polyethylene glycol (PEG).

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Conformational gel analysis and graphics systematically identifies and
evaluates plausible alternatives to the side chain conformations found by
conventional peptide or protein structure determination methods. The proposed
analysis determines the populations of side chain rotational isomers and the
probability distribution of these populations. The following steps are repeated
for each side chain of a peptide or protein: first, extract the local molecular
mechanics of side chain rotational isomerization from a single representative
global conformation; second, expand the predominant set of rotational isomers
to include all probable rotational isomers down to those that constitute just a
small percentage of the population; and third, evaluate the constraints vicinal
coupling constants and NOESY cross relaxation rates place on rotational isomer
populations. In this article we apply conformational gel analysis to the cobalt
glycyl-leucine dipeptide and detail the steps necessary to generalize the
analysis to other amino acid side chains in other peptides and proteins. For a
side chain buried within a protein interior, it is noteworthy that the set of
probable rotational isomers may contain one or more rotational isomers that are
not identified by conventional NMR structure determination methods. In cases
such as this the conformational gel graphics fully accounts for the interplay
of molecular mechanics and NMR data constraints on the population estimates.
The analysis is particularly suited to identifying side chain rotational
isomers that constitute a small percentage of the population, but nevertheless
might be structurally and functionally very significant.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Comment on "Enhanced transmission through periodic arrays of subwavelength
holes: the role of localized waveguide resonances" [Phys.Rev.Lett. 96, 233901
(2006)]

Categories: physics.pop-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: This brief article discusses some aspects of quantum theory and their impact
on popular culture. The basic features of quantum entanglement between two or
more parties are introduced in a language suitable for a general audience, and
metaphorically connected to love and faithfulness in human relationships.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Simple general formula describing the p-V-T relationships of elastic solids
is derived from theoretical considerations. The new EoS was tested to
experiments of perovskite 0-109 GPa and 293-2000 K. The parameters providing
the best fit are: Ko = 267.5 GPa, Vo = 24.284 cm3, alpha_o = 2.079x10^-5 K^-1,
the pressure derivative of Ko is 1.556 and the pressure derivative of alpha_o
is -1.098x10^-7 K^-1GPa^-1 . The root-mean-square-deviations (RMSD) of the
residuals are 0.043 cm3, 0.79 GPa, and 125 K for the molar volume, pressure,
and temperature respectively. These RMSD values are in the range of the
uncertainty of the experiments, indicating that the five parameters
semi-empirical EoS correctly describes the p-V-T relationships of perovskite.
Separating the experiments into 200 K ranges the semi-empirical EoS was
compared to the most widely used finite strain, interatomic potential, and
empirical isothermal EoSs such as the Birch-Murnaghan, the Vinet, and the
Roy-Roy respectively. Correlation coefficients, RMSDs of the residuals and
Akaike Information Criteria were used for evaluating the fitting. Based on
these fitting parameters under pure isothermal conditions the semi-empirical
p-V EoS is slightly weaker than the Birch-Murnaghan and Vinet EoSs; however,
the semi-empirical p-V-T EoS is superior in every temperature range to all of
the investigated conventional isothermal EoSs.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A new model for the explanation of the high frequency quasi-periodic
oscillations (QPOs) in pulsars, black holes and white dwarfs is presented.
Three circular tori are assumed to be present around the star: an inner torus
with charge $Q_i$, an outer torus with charge $Q_o$ and a torus with
electrically neutral mass $m_m$ in the middle, whereas the star bears a charge
$Q_s$ ($Q_o$ and $Q_s$ have the same sign, $Q_i$ the opposite one). The
frequency $\nu_m$ of the mass current is approximately given by the Kepler
frequency, whereas the frequencies of $Q_i$ and $Q_o$, $\nu_i$ and $\nu_o$,
respectively, are calculated from classical mechanics and Coulomb's law.
  For the explanation of the low frequency QPOs in pulsars and black holes a
special interpretation of the gravitomagnetic theory may be essential. From the
latter theory four new gravitomagnetic precession frequencies are deduced,
which may be identified with the observed low frequency QPOs.
  Predictions of the presented model are compared with observed high frequency
and low frequency QPOs of the pulsars SAX J1808.4--3658, XTE J1807--294, IGR
J00291+5934, SGR 1806--20 and the black hole XTE J1550--564. In addition,
charge flow near the pole of pulsars may explain frequency drift of burst
oscillations. Moreover, charge flow at the equator of SAX J1808.4--3658 may be
the cause of the enigmatic 410 kHz QPO. Furthermore, the Lense-Thirring
frequency is discussed and a modified formula is compared with data of the
pulsars.
  Contrary to pulsars and black holes, the low frequency QPOs of white dwarfs
might be attributed to electromagnetic precession frequencies, deduced in this
work. Predictions are compared with data of the dwarf nova VW Hyi.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It has long been proposed that black hole singularities bounce to deliver
daughter universes. Here the consequences of such a scenario are explored in
light of Lee Smolin's hypothesis of Cosmological Natural Selection and Weak
Anthropic Principle. The explorations lead towards the answer to the question
Are We Alone in the Multiverse?

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper, we present a framework for getting a series of exact vacuum
solutions to the Einstein equation. This procedure of resolution is based on a
canonical form of the metric. According to this procedure, the Einstein
equation can be reduced to some 2-dimensional Laplace-like equations or
rotation and divergence equations, which are much convenient for the
resolution.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: The multiple scale expansion method is used to derive amplitude equations for
a system with thermohaline convection in the neighborhood of Hopf and Taylor
bifurcation points and at the double zero point of the dispersion relation. A
complex Ginzburg-Landau equation, a Newell-Whitehead-type equation, and an
equation of the $\phi^4$ type, respectively, were obtained. Analytic
expressions for the coefficients of these equations and their various
asymptotic forms are presented. In the case of Hopf bifurcation for low and
high frequencies, the amplitude equation reduces to a perturbed nonlinear
Schr\"odinger equation. In the high-frequency limit, structures of the type of
"dark" solitons are characteristic of the examined physical system.

Categories: physics.pop-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper we examine the detailed theory of the American football in
flight, with spin and air resistance included. We find the theory has much in
common with the theory of a gyroscope and also rocket trajectory with a
misaligned thruster. Unfortunately most of the air resistance data, for
rocketry and ballistics, is for speeds of Mach 1 or higher, where the air
resistance increases dramatically. We shall approximate a realistic air
resistance, at the slower speeds of football flight, with a drag force
proportional to cross sectional area and either $v$ or $v^2$, depending on
speed, where $v$ is velocity of the football. We begin with a discussion of the
motion, giving as much detail as possible without the use of complex analytic
calculations. We point out the previous errors made with moments of inertia and
make the necessary corrections for more accurate results. We show that the
shape of an American football closely resembles a parabola of revolution.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The rings observed around supernova remnant 1987A are emitted by a plasma
mainly made of ionized and neutral hydrogen atoms. With a density of 10 power
10 atoms per cubic metre, and at least a dimension of plasma of 0.01
light-year, the column density is 10 power 24 atoms per square metre, much more
than needed for an optically thick gas at Lyman frequencies (Case B). While, at
10000 K, the bulky gas would absorb Lyman lines fully, at 50000K it emits
superradiant lines. As superradiance de-excites the atoms strongly, nearly all
available energy is emitted in a few competing modes: Superradiance appears
only for beams which cross the largest column densities; for an observation
from Earth, these beams generate three elliptical hollow cylinders whose bases
are the observed rings; admitting that the Earth is not in a privileged
direction, these cylinders envelope ellipsoidal shells observed, for the
external rings, by photon echoes. For the equatorial ring, the brightness of
the superradiant beams is multiplied by a quasi-resonant induced scattering of
the rays emitted by the star. The de-excitation of atoms by emitted beams cools
the gas strongly, so that ionization decreases fast, the process self
accelerates. The energy of the high radiance rays from the star is strongly
scattered to the ring while the low radiance of the glow which surrounds the
star is rather amplified. The fast absorption of the radial beams produces the
radial decrease of radiance of the ring while a competition of modes produces
the pearls.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.optics
Abstract: According to a recent proposal [S. Takayama et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 87,
061107 (2005)], the triangular lattice of triangular air holes may allow to
achieve a complete photonic band gap in two-dimensional photonic crystal slabs.
In this work we present a systematic theoretical study of this photonic lattice
in a high-index membrane, and a comparison with the conventional triangular
lattice of circular holes, by means of the guided-mode expansion method whose
detailed formulation is described here. Photonic mode dispersion below and
above the light line, gap maps, and intrinsic diffraction losses of
quasi-guided modes are calculated for the periodic lattice as well as for line-
and point-defects defined therein. The main results are summarized as follows:
(i) the triangular lattice of triangular holes does indeed have a complete
photonic band gap for the fundamental guided mode, but the useful region is
generally limited by the presence of second-order waveguide modes; (ii) the
lattice may support the usual photonic band gap for even modes (quasi-TE
polarization) and several band gaps for odd modes (quasi-TM polarization),
which could be tuned in order to achieve doubly-resonant frequency conversion
between an even mode at the fundamental frequency and an odd mode at the
second-harmonic frequency; (iii) diffraction losses of quasi-guided modes in
the triangular lattices with circular and triangular holes, and in line-defect
waveguides or point-defect cavities based on these geometries, are comparable.
The results point to the interest of the triangular lattice of triangular holes
for nonlinear optics, and show the usefulness of the guided-mode expansion
method for calculating photonic band dispersion and diffraction losses,
especially for higher-lying photonic modes.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, physics.optics
Abstract: A theoretical description of radiation-matter coupling for
semiconductor-based photonic crystal slabs is presented, in which quantum wells
are embedded within the waveguide core layer. A full quantum theory is
developed, by quantizing both the electromagnetic field with a spatial
modulation of the refractive index and the exciton center of mass field in a
periodic piecewise constant potential. The second-quantized hamiltonian of the
interacting system is diagonalized with a generalized Hopfield method, thus
yielding the complex dispersion of mixed exciton-photon modes including losses.
The occurrence of both weak and strong coupling regimes is studied, and it is
concluded that the new eigenstates of the system are described by
quasi-particles called photonic crystal polaritons, which can occur in two
situations: (i) below the light line, when a resonance between exciton and
non-radiative photon levels occurs (guided polaritons), (ii) above the light
line, provided the exciton-photon coupling is larger than the intrinsic
radiative damping of the resonant photonic mode (radiative polaritons). For a
square lattice of air holes, it is found that the energy minimum of the lower
polariton branch can occur around normal incidence. The latter result has
potential implications for the realization of polariton parametric interactions
in photonic crystal slabs.

Categories: physics.class-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: We investigate the effects of relatively rapid variations of the boundaries
of an overmoded cavity on the stochastic properties of its interior acoustic or
electromagnetic field. For quasi-static variations, this field can be
represented as an ideal incoherent and statistically homogeneous isotropic
random scalar or vector field, respectively. A physical model is constructed
showing that the field dynamics can be characterized as a generalized diffusion
process. The Langevin--It\^{o} and Fokker--Planck equations are derived and
their associated statistics and distributions for the complex analytic field,
its magnitude and energy density are computed. The energy diffusion parameter
is found to be proportional to the square of the ratio of the standard
deviation of the source field to the characteristic time constant of the
dynamic process, but is independent of the initial energy density, to first
order. The energy drift vanishes in the asymptotic limit. The time-energy
probability distribution is in general not separable, as a result of
nonstationarity. A general solution of the Fokker--Planck equation is obtained
in integral form, together with explicit closed-form solutions for several
asymptotic cases. The findings extend known results on statistics and
distributions of quasi-stationary ideal random fields (pure diffusions), which
are retrieved as special cases.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: A magnetic detector such as MINOS which is measuring the sign of muons has to
deal with issues of bending, which depend on the magnetic field configuration,
and multiple scattering, which depends on the amount of material which is
traversed. Above some momentum which depends on these factors, the momentum
cannot be resolved. Issues related to measurement of the muon charge ratio in
MINOS are discussed.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We describe a sensor for the measurement of thin dielectric layers capable of
operation in a variety of environments. The sensor is obtained by
microfabricating a capacitor with interleaved aluminum fingers, exposed to the
dielectric to be measured. In particular, the device can measure thin layers of
solid frozen from a liquid or gaseous medium. Sensitivity to single atomic
layers is achievable in many configurations and, by utilizing fast, high
sensitivity capacitance read out in a feedback system onto environmental
parameters, coatings of few layers can be dynamically maintained. We discuss
the design, read out and calibration of several versions of the device
optimized in different ways. We specifically dwell on the case in which
atomically thin solid xenon layers are grown and stabilized, in cryogenic
conditions, from a liquid xenon bath.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Since molecular energy transformations are responsible for chemical reaction
rates at the most fundamental level, chemical kinetics should provide some
information about molecular energies. This is the premise and objective of this
note. We describe a Hamiltonian formulation for kinetic rate equations where
the concentrations are the generalized coordinates and the conjugate momenta
are simply related to individual average molecular energies. Simple examples
are presented and the resulting energy relations naturally include
non-equilibrium reactions. An analysis predicts the reasonable outcome that
thermal agitation of a composite molecule increases its rate of dissociation.

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: We present a detailed investigation of static dipole polarizability of
lithium clusters containing up to 22 atoms. We first build a database of
lithium clusters by optimizing several candidate structures for the ground
state geometry for each size. The full polarizability tensor is determined for
about 5-6 isomers of each cluster size using the finite-field method. All
calculations are performed using large Gaussian basis sets, and within the
generalized gradient approximation to the density functional theory, as
implemented in the NRLMOL suite of codes. The average polarizability per atom
varies from 11 to 9 Angstrom^3, within the 8-22 size range and show smoother
decrease with increase in cluster size than the experimental values. While the
average polarizability exhibits a relatively weak dependence on cluster
conformation, significant changes in the degree of anisotropy of the
polarizability tensor are observed. Interestingly, in addition to the expected
even odd (0 and 1 $\mu_B$) magnetic states, our results show several cases
where clusters with an odd number of Li atoms exhibit elevated spin states
(e.g. 3 $\mu_B$).

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Based on the concept of curved spacetime in Einsteinian General Relativity,
the field theories and their quantum theories in the curved octonion spaces etc
are discussed. The research results discover the close relationships of the
curved spacetimes with the field theories and quantum theories. In the field
theories of curved spacetimes, the curvatures have direct effect on field
strength and field source etc. While the curvatures have direct impact on wave
functions and quantum equations etc in the quantum theories of curved
spacetimes. The research results discover that some abnormal phenomena of field
source particles could be explained by the field theories or quantum theories
in the curved spacetimes.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We have developed a small, neutrally buoyant, wireless temperature sensor.
Using a camera for optical tracking, we obtain simultaneous measurements of
position and temperature of the sensor as it is carried along by the flow in
Rayleigh-B\'enard convection, at $Ra \sim 10^{10}$. We report on statistics of
temperature, velocity, and heat transport in turbulent thermal convection. The
motion of the sensor particle exhibits dynamics close to that of Lagrangian
tracers in hydrodynamic turbulence. We also quantify heat transport in plumes,
revealing self-similarity and extreme variations from plume to plume.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: Two-dimensional (2D) equations describing the nonlinear interaction between
upper-hybrid and dispersive magnetosonic waves are presented. Nonlocal
nonlinearity in the equations results in the possibility of existence of stable
2D nonlinear structures. A rigorous proof of the absence of collapse in the
model is given. We have found numerically different types of nonlinear
localized structures such as fundamental solitons, radially symmetric vortices,
nonrotating multisolitons (two-hump solitons, dipoles and quadrupoles), and
rotating multisolitons (azimuthons). By direct numerical simulations we show
that 2D fundamental solitons with negative hamiltonian are stable.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The dynamics of information dissemination in social networks is of paramount
importance in processes such as rumors or fads propagation, spread of product
innovations or "word-of-mouth" communications. Due to the difficulty in
tracking a specific information when it is transmitted by people, most
understanding of information spreading in social networks comes from models or
indirect measurements. Here we present an integrated experimental and
theoretical framework to understand and quantitatively predict how and when
information spreads over social networks. Using data collected in Viral
Marketing campaigns that reached over 31,000 individuals in eleven European
markets, we show the large degree of variability of the participants' actions,
despite them being confronted with the common task of receiving and forwarding
the same piece of information. This have a profound effect on information
diffusion: Firstly, most of the transmission takes place due to super-spreading
events which would be considered extraordinary in population-average models.
Secondly, due to the different way individuals schedule information
transmission we observe a slowing down of the spreading of information in
social networks that happens in logarithmic time. Quantitative description of
the experiments is possible through an stochastic branching process which
corroborates the importance of heterogeneity. Since high variability of both
the intensity and frequency of human responses are found in many other
activities, our findings are pertinent to many other human driven diffusion
processes like rumors, fads, innovations or news which has important
consequences for organizations management, communications, marketing or
electronic social communities.

Categories: q-bio.PE, math.ST, nlin.AO, physics.soc-ph, stat.TH
Abstract: We study the problem of the emergence of cooperation in the spatial
Prisoner's Dilemma. The pioneering work by Nowak and May showed that large
initial populations of cooperators can survive and sustain cooperation in a
square lattice with imitate-the-best evolutionary dynamics. We revisit this
problem in a cost-benefit formulation suitable for a number of biological
applications. We show that if a fixed-amount reward is established for
cooperators to share, a single cooperator can invade a population of defectors
and form structures that are resilient to re-invasion even if the reward
mechanism is turned off. We discuss analytically the case of the invasion by a
single cooperator and present agent-based simulations for small initial
fractions of cooperators. Large cooperation levels, in the sustainability
range, are found. In the conclusions we discuss possible applications of this
model as well as its connections with other mechanisms proposed to promote the
emergence of cooperation.

Categories: nucl-th, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In recent years, a large number of papers have appeared that dealt with
$\EPEM$ pair production in heavy ion collisions at high energies. To a large
extent these studies were motivated by the existence of relativistic heavy ion
accelerators all over the world. There pair production can be studied in so
called ``ultra-peripheral collisions'', where the ions do not come close enough
to interact strongly with each other. Various different methods have been used
and it is the purpose of this review to present a unified picture of the
present status of the field.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: It was proposed that perfect invisibility cloaks can be constructed for
hiding objects from electromagnetic illumination (Pendry et al., Science 312,
p. 1780). The cylindrical cloaks experimentally demonstrated (Schurig et al.,
Science 314, p. 997) and proposed (Cai et al., Nat. Photon. 1, p. 224) have
however simplified material parameters in order to facilitate easier
realization as well as to avoid infinities in optical constants. Here we show
that the cylindrical cloaks with simplified material parameters inherently
allow the zeroth-order cylindrical wave to pass through the cloak as if the
cloak is made of a homogeneous isotropic medium, and thus visible. To all
high-order cylindrical waves, our numerical simulation suggests that the
simplified cloak inherits some properties of the ideal cloak, but finite
scatterings exist.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: The work contains the description of two narrow IR-bands observational data
of total lunar eclipse of March, 3, 2007, one- and two-dimensional procedures
of radiative transfer equation solution. The results of the procedure are the
extinction values for atmospheric aerosol and water vapor at different
altitudes in the troposphere along the Earth's terminator crossing North
America, Arctic, Siberia and South-Eastern Asia. The altitude range and
possible latitude and altitude resoltion of atmosphere remote sensing by the
lunar eclipses observation are fixed. The results of water vapor retrieval are
compared with data of space experiment, the scale of vertical water vapor
distribution is found.

Categories: physics.class-ph, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We compute the local spectrum of the magnetic field near a metallic
microstructure at finite temperature. Our main focus is on deviations from a
plane-layered geometry for which we review the main properties. Arbitrary
geometries are handled with the help of numerical calculations based on surface
integral equations. The magnetic noise shows a significant polarization
anisotropy above flat wires with finite lateral width, in stark contrast to an
infinitely wide wire. Within the limits of a two-dimensional setting, our
results provide accurate estimates for loss and dephasing rates in so-called
`atom chip traps' based on metallic wires. A simple approximation based on the
incoherent summation of local current elements gives qualitative agreement with
the numerics, but fails to describe current correlations among neighboring
objects.

Categories: cond-mat.other, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, cond-mat.soft, nlin.PS, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Liesegang patterns emerge from precipitation processes and may be used to
build bulk structures at submicron lengthscales. Thus they have significant
potential for technological applications provided adequate methods of control
can be devised. Here we describe a simple, physically realizable
pattern-control based on the notion of driven precipitation, meaning that the
phase-separation is governed by a guiding field such as, for example, a
temperature or a pH field. The phase-separation is modeled through a
non-autonomous Cahn-Hilliard equation whose spinodal is determined by the
evolving guiding field. Control over the dynamics of the spinodal gives control
over the velocity of the instability front which separates the stable and
unstable regions of the system. Since the wavelength of the pattern is largely
determined by this velocity, the distance between successive precipitation
bands becomes controllable. We demonstrate the above ideas by numerical studies
of a 1D system with diffusive guiding field. We find that the results can be
accurately described by employing a linear stability analysis (pulled-front
theory) for determining the velocity -- local-wavelength relationship. From the
perspective of the Liesegang theory, our results indicate that the so-called
revert patterns may be naturally generated by diffusive guiding fields.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: A novel concept of self-phasematched optical frequency conversion in
dispersive dielectric microcavities is studied theoretically and
experimentally. We develop a time-dependent model, incorporating the dispersion
into the structure of the spatial cavity modes and translating the
phasematching requirement into the optimization of a nonlinear cavity mode
overlap. We design and fabricate integrated double-resonance semiconductor
microcavities for self-phasematched second harmonic generation. The measured
efficiency exhibits a significant maximum near the cavity resonance due to the
intra-cavity enhancement of the input power and the dispersion-induced
wavelength detuning effect on the mode overlap, in good agreement with our
theoretical predictions.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The limited number of active pixels in a Geiger-mode Avalanche Photodiode
(G-APD) results not only in a non-linearity but also in an additional
fluctuation of its response. Both these effects are taken into account to
calculate the amplitude resolution of an ideal G-APD, which is shown to be
finite. As one of the consequences, the energy resolution of a scintillation
detector based on a G-APD is shown to be limited to some minimum value defined
by the number of pixels in the G-APD.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The paper analyses volt-ampere characteristics of a planar vacuum diode with
mono-energetic electrons, emitted by the cathode (an electron beam). The
movement of the electron beam in the volume of the diode is described. An
analytic dependence of the volt-ampere characteristics in an unlimited and
limited by the field mode of the electron beam is derived.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We demonstrate an efficient scheme for continuous trap loading based upon
spatially selective optical pumping. We discuss the case of $^{1}$S$_{0}$
calcium atoms in an optical dipole trap (ODT), however, similar strategies
should be applicable to a wide range of atomic species. Our starting point is a
reservoir of moderately cold ($\approx 300 \mu$K) metastable
$^{3}$P$_{2}$-atoms prepared by means of a magneto-optic trap (triplet-MOT). A
focused 532 nm laser beam produces a strongly elongated optical potential for
$^{1}$S$_{0}$-atoms with up to 350 $\mu$K well depth. A weak focused laser beam
at 430 nm, carefully superimposed upon the ODT beam, selectively pumps the
$^{3}$P$_{2}$-atoms inside the capture volume to the singlet state, where they
are confined by the ODT. The triplet-MOT perpetually refills the capture volume
with $^{3}$P$_{2}$-atoms thus providing a continuous stream of cold atoms into
the ODT at a rate of $10^7 $s$^{-1}$. Limited by evaporation loss, in 200 ms we
typically load $5 \times 10^5$ atoms with an initial radial temperature of 85
$\mu$K. After terminating the loading we observe evaporation during 50 ms
leaving us with $10^5$ atoms at radial temperatures close to 40 $\mu$K and a
peak phase space density of $6.8 \times 10^{-5}$. We point out that a
comparable scheme could be employed to load a dipole trap with
$^{3}$P$_{0}$-atoms.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: A general reconstruction and calibration procedure for tracking and wire
position determination of the OPERA drift tubes is presented. The mathematics
of the pattern recognition and the track fit are explained.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: A non-local cascade model for anisotropic MHD turbulence in the presence of a
guiding magnetic field is proposed. The model takes into account that (a)
energy cascades in an anisotropic manner and as a result a different estimate
for the cascade rate in the direction parallel and perpendicular to the guiding
field is made. (b) the interactions that result in the cascade are between
different scales. Eddies with wave numbers $k_\|$ and $k_\perp$ interact with
eddies with wave numbers $q_\|,q_\perp$ such that a resonance condition between
the wave numbers $q_\|,q_\perp$ and $k_\|,k_\perp$ holds. As a consequence
energy from the eddy with wave numbers $k_\|$ and $k_\perp$ cascades due to
interactions with eddies located in the resonant manifold whose wavenumbers are
determined by: $q_\|\simeq \epsilon^{{1}/{3}}k_\perp^{2/3}/B$,
$q_\perp=k_\perp$ and energy will cascade along the lines $k_\|\sim
C+k_\perp^{2/3} \epsilon^{1/3}/B_0$. For a uniform energy injection rate in the
parallel direction the resulting energy spectrum is $E(k_\|,k_\perp)\simeq
\epsilon^{2/3}k_\|^{-1}k_\perp^{-5/3}$. For a general forcing however the model
suggests a non-universal behavior. The connections with previous models,
numerical simulations and weak turbulence theory are discussed.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Saturation effects affecting absorption and fluorescence spectra of an atomic
vapor confined in an Extremely Thin Cell (cell thickness $L < 1 \mu m$) are
investigated experimentally and theoretically. The study is performed on the
$D_{2}$ line ($\lambda ~= ~852 nm)$ of $Cs$ and concentrates on the two
situations $L = \lambda /2$ and $L =\lambda$, the most contrasted ones with
respect to the length dependence of the coherent Dicke narrowing. For $L =
\lambda /2$, the Dicke-narrowed absorption profile simply broadens and
saturates in amplitude when increasing the light intensity, while for $L
=\lambda$, sub-Doppler dips of reduced absorption at line-center appear on the
broad absorption profile. For a fluorescence detection at $L =\lambda$,
saturation induces narrow dips, but only for hyperfine components undergoing a
population loss through optical pumping. These experimental results are
interpreted with the help of the various existing models, and are compared with
numerical calculations based upon a two-level modelling that considers both a
closed and an open system.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In 2001, Seth Lloyd presented a radical new critique of the universe as a
quantum computing device, with an upper limit of bit calculations of the order
of 10 to the 120 power. We find that his calculations permit us to reconcile
the existance of a huge cosmological constant 10 to the minus 43 seconds after
the big bang, with a resulting huge relic graviton flux, with the existance of
a CMBR observational barrier of z = 1100 years after the big bang. Lloyd's
calculations pre suppose the existence of a huge entropy value during the
nucleation of a new universe, a datum we think helps shed light on the
cosmological landscape problem.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Magnetism in nanographenes (also know as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, or
PAHs) are studied with first principles density functional calculations. We
find that an antiferromagnetic (AFM) phase appears as the PAH reaches a certain
size. This AFM phase in PAHs has the same origin as the one in infinitely long
zigzag-edged graphene nanoribbons, namely, from the localized electronic state
at the zigzag edge. The smallest PAH still having an AFM ground state is
identified. With increased length of the zigzag edge, PAHs approach an
infinitely long ribbon in terms of (1) the energetic ordering and difference
among the AFM, ferromagnetic (FM), and nonmagnetic (NM) phases and (2) the
average local magnetic moment at the zigzag edges. These PAHs serve as ideal
targets for chemical synthesis of nanographenes that possess magnetic
properties. Moreover, our calculations support the interpretation that
experimentally observed magnetism in activated carbon fibers originates from
the zigzag edges of the nanographenes.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, nlin.CD
Abstract: Quantum-resonance ratchets associated with the periodically kicked particle
are experimentally realized for the first time. This is achieved by using a
Bose-Einstein condensate exposed to a pulsed standing light wave and prepared
in an initial state differing from the usual plane wave. Both the standing-wave
potential and the initial state have a point symmetry around some center and
the ratchet arises from the non-coincidence of the two centers. The dependence
of the directed quantum transport on the quasimomentum is studied. A detailed
theoretical analysis is used to explain the experimental results.

Categories: physics.space-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Plasma pressure distribution in the inner magnetosphere is one of the key
parameters for understanding the main magnetospheric processes including
geomagnetic storms and substorms. However, the pressure profiles obtained from
in-situ particle measurements by the high-altitude satellites do not allow
tracking the pressure variations related to the storms and substorms, because a
time interval needed to do this generally exceeds the characteristic times of
them. On contrary, fast movement of low-altitude satellites makes it possible
to retrieve quasi-instantaneous profiles of plasma pressure along the satellite
trajectory, using the fluxes of precipitating particles. For this study, we
used the Aureol-3 satellite data for plasma pressure estimation, and the IGRF,
Tsyganenko 2001 and Tsyganenko 2004 storm time geomagnetic field models for the
pressure mapping into the equatorial plane. It was found that during quiet
geomagnetic condition the radial pressure profiles obtained coincide with the
profiles, obtained previously from the high-altitude measurements. On the
contrary, it was found that during geomagnetic storm the plasma pressure
profiles became sharper; the position of the maximum of plasma pressure
corresponds to expected one for given Dst minimum; the maximum value of inner
magnetosphere static pressure correlates with the solar wind dynamic pressure.
Increase in the plasma pressure profiles indicates the possibility to consider
the interchange instability as one of important factors for the development of
the main phase of geomagnetic storm.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.data-an
Abstract: The motion of assemblies of point vortices in a periodic parallelogram can be
described by the complex position $z_j(t)$ whose time derivative is given by
the sum of the complex velocities induced by other vortices and the solid
rotation centered at $z_j$. A numerical simulation up to 100 vortices in a
square periodic box is performed with various initial conditions, including
single and double rows, uniform spacing, checkered pattern, and complete
spatial randomness. Point process theory in spatial ecology is applied in order
to quantify clustering of the distribution of vortices. In many cases,
clustering of the distribution persists after a long time if the initial
condition is clustered. In the case of positive and negative vortices with the
same absolute value of strength, the $L$ function becomes positive for both
types of vortices. Scattering or recoupling of pairs of vortices by a third
vortex is remarkable.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: This article is a thorough critique to the Weniger's comments made to our
papers published in prestigious journals in the recent years. A detailed and
critical examination of the arguments that led to the suggested comment by
Weniger reveals some serious flaws. In our published papers we have shown that
the unsymmetrical and symmetrical one-range addition theorems for Slater type
orbitals, Coulomb-Yukawa like correlated interaction potentials (CIPs) and
their derivatives are derived from the expansions in terms of -ETOs that are
complete and orthonormal sets of exponential type orbitals in corresponding
Hilbert spaces, where The concrete criticism raised in Weniger's comment
against our papers actually touches a very minor aspect of the works that are
not relevant at all for the conclusions, which are made. As can be seen from
our papers, all of the formulas for different kinds of multicenter integrals
over Slater type orbitals with integer and noninteger principal quantum numbers
obtained by the use of unsymmetrical and symmetrical one-range addition
theorems were tested by computer calculations. We reject the Weniger's personal
views about papers published by Guseinov and his coworkers from 1978 to 2006
and respectable referees on one-range addition theorems and multicenter
integrals. All claims of inconsistencies and flaws in the theoretical framework
are rejected as unfounded. This rejoinder paper contains all of the answers to
Weniger's comments.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Some of the more powerful results of mathematical statistics are becoming of
increasing importance in statistical mechanics. Here the use of the central
limit theorem in conjunction with the canonical ensemble is shown to lead to an
interesting and important new insight into results associated with the
canonical ensemble. This theoretical work is illustrated numerically and it is
shown how this numerical work can form the basis of an undergraduate laboratory
experiment which should help to implant ideas of statistical mechanics in
students' minds.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: The atomic bomb American program known as Manhattan Project has been studied
in detail. Historians argue that the beginning of this program is rooted in the
letter Einstein sent to American President Roosevelt in the summer of 1939.
This article examines Einstein's activities before 1933 as radical pacifist in
favor of the principles of universal disarmament and outspoken supporter of
individual war resistance and the shift of this posture when Hitler came to
power in 1933. In this context, we discuss the role played by nuclear
physicists during the Second World War and Einstein's decision to promote the
construction of an atomic weapon in the United States. Finally, the article
analyzes Einstein's struggle against the atomic race during the beginning of
the cold war.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, physics.pop-ph
Abstract: Western thinking underwent a turning point between 1885 and 1925. Einstein in
1905 symbolizes the emblematic hinge of this change of direction. To find an
equivalent phenomenon in the past we need to go back to the period from the XV
century to the XVII century. It was not a mere reform of codes but a new code.
In 1905 the perception of reality changed through the introduction of
relativism in three levels of the reference systems: the ego-other relation,
the world perceived by the senses, and the 'ideal' universe of the concepts. We
will try to identify how this change was expressed and developed in the cited
levels, both in the physic and nature based sciences, in the social sciences,
and in literature and fine arts. Today, 100 years after, the 1905's generation
still proposes us two options: to live sheltered by the dogma that reassures us
with its only and exclusive viewpoint claimed objective, or to dare to live
with the multiple, the transient, the relative. The first way led to the worst
regimes and intolerant ideas of the XX century, the second option throws us
into the uncertainty of the creative adventure, but also leads us to the
possibility of a fairer society in the XXI century.

Categories: nlin.SI, math-ph, math.MP, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Searching for a Lagrangian may seem either a trivial endeavour or an
impossible task. In this paper we show that the Jacobi last multiplier
associated with the Lie symmetries admitted by simple models of classical
mechanics produces (too?) many Lagrangians in a simple way. We exemplify the
method by such a classic as the simple harmonic oscillator, the harmonic
oscillator in disguise [H Goldstein, {\it Classical Mechanics}, 2nd edition
(Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1980)] and the damped harmonic oscillator. This is
the first paper in a series dedicated to this subject.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We discuss a parity nonconserving (PNC) asymmetry in the cross section of
dielectronic recombination of polarized electrons on multiply charged ions with
Z>40. This effect is strongly enhanced for close doubly-excited states of
opposite parity in the intermediate compound ion. Such states are known for
He-like ions. However, these levels have large energy and large radiative
widths which hampers observation of the PNC asymmetry. We argue that
accidentally degenerate states of the more complex ions may be more suitable
for the corresponding experiment.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We study the dynamics of co-evolution of producers and customers described by
bit-strings representing individual traits. Individual ''size-like'' properties
are controlled by binary encounters which outcome depends upon a recognition
process. Depending upon the parameter set-up, mutual selection of producers and
customers results in different types of attractors, either an exclusive niches
regime or a competition regime.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: This comment clarifies the relation of the research in a recently published
article [Phys. Plasmas 14, 042503 (2007)] to other prior publications
addressing the inclusion of electromagnetic and drift-kinetic electron physics
in gyrokinetic simulation, raises a concern related to the inclusion of kinetic
electrons in a system with magnetic shear, and discusses alternatives in the
face of an important limitation on the general applicability of the algorithm
described therein.

Categories: physics.class-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: By expressing the time-independent Schrodinger equation in one dimension as a
system of two first-order differential equations, the transfer matrix for a
rectangular potential barrier is obtained making use of the matrix exponential.
It is shown that the transfer matrix allows one to find the bound states and
the quasinormal modes. A similar treatment for the one-dimensional propagation
of electromagnetic waves in a homogeneous medium is also presented.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, cond-mat.stat-mech
Abstract: We propose a new, cyclic-voltammetry based experimental technique that can
not only differentiate between discontinuous and continuous phase transitions
in an adsorbate layer, but also quite accurately recover equilibrium behavior
from dynamic analysis of systems with a continuous phase transition. The
Electrochemical first-order reversal curve (EC-FORC) diagram for a
discontinuous phase transition (nucleation and growth), such as occurs in
underpotential deposition, is characterized by a negative region, while such a
region does not exist for a continuous phase transition, such as occurs in the
electrosorption of Br on Ag(100). Moreover, for systems with a continuous phase
transition, the minima of the individual EC-FORCs trace the equilibrium curve,
even at very high scan rates. Since obtaining experimental data for the EC-FORC
method would require only a simple reprogramming of the potentiostat used in
conventional cyclic-voltammetry experiments, we believe that this method has
significant potential for easy, rapid, in-situ analysis of systems undergoing
electrochemical deposition.

Categories: physics.data-an, cond-mat.dis-nn, stat.AP, stat.ME
Abstract: Power-law distributions occur in many situations of scientific interest and
have significant consequences for our understanding of natural and man-made
phenomena. Unfortunately, the detection and characterization of power laws is
complicated by the large fluctuations that occur in the tail of the
distribution -- the part of the distribution representing large but rare events
-- and by the difficulty of identifying the range over which power-law behavior
holds. Commonly used methods for analyzing power-law data, such as
least-squares fitting, can produce substantially inaccurate estimates of
parameters for power-law distributions, and even in cases where such methods
return accurate answers they are still unsatisfactory because they give no
indication of whether the data obey a power law at all. Here we present a
principled statistical framework for discerning and quantifying power-law
behavior in empirical data. Our approach combines maximum-likelihood fitting
methods with goodness-of-fit tests based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic
and likelihood ratios. We evaluate the effectiveness of the approach with tests
on synthetic data and give critical comparisons to previous approaches. We also
apply the proposed methods to twenty-four real-world data sets from a range of
different disciplines, each of which has been conjectured to follow a power-law
distribution. In some cases we find these conjectures to be consistent with the
data while in others the power law is ruled out.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, astro-ph, q-bio.PE
Abstract: We have investigated the migration behaviors of uranium (U) and thorium (Th)
in Earth and other terrestrial planets. Theoretical models of U and Th
migration have been proposed. These models suggest that the unique features of
Earth are closely connected with its unique U and Th migration models and
distribution patterns. In the Earth, U and Th can combine with oxidative
volatile components and water, migrate up to the asthenosphere position to form
an enrichment zone (EZ) of U and Th first, and then migrate up further to the
crusts through magmatism and metamorphism. We emphasize that the formation of
an EZ of U, Th and other heat-producing elements is a prerequisite for the
formation of a plate tectonic system. The heat-producing elements, currently
mainly U and Th, in the EZ are also the energy sources that drive the formation
and evolution of the crust of Earth and create special granitic continental
crusts. In other terrestrial planets, including Mercury, Venus, and Mars, an EZ
can not be formed because of a lack of oxidative volatile components and water.
For this reason, a plate tectonic system can not been developed in these
planets. We also emphasize the influence of U and Th in EZ on the development
and evolution of life on Earth. We propose that since the Earth and planets
were born in a united solar system, there should be some common mechanisms to
create the similarities and differences between them. We have tried to develop
an integrated view to explain some problems in the tectonics of Earth and
evolution, bio-evolution, and planetary dynamics through U and Th geochemistry.
We believe that a comprehensive exploration on energy sources and their
evolution is a good way to build bridges between different disciplines of
science in order to better understand the Earth and planets.

Categories: hep-th, cond-mat.mes-hall, math-ph, math.MP, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We review the connection between noncommutative gauge theory, matrix models
and fluid mechanical systems. The noncommutative Chern-Simons description of
the quantum Hall effect and bosonization of collective fermion states are used
as specific examples.

Categories: physics.ins-det, astro-ph, nucl-ex
Abstract: The Yale-Weizmann collaboration aims to develop a low-radioactivity
(low-background) cryogenic noble liquid detector for Dark-Matter (DM) search in
measurements to be performed deep underground as for example carried out by the
XENON collaboration. A major issue is the background induced by natural
radioactivity of present-detector components including the Photo Multiplier
Tubes (PMT) made from glass with large U-Th content. We propose to use advanced
Thick Gaseous Electron Multipliers (THGEM) recently developed at the Weizmann
Institute of Science (WIS). These "hole-multipliers" will measure in a
two-phase (liquid/gas) Xe detector electrons extracted into the gas phase from
both ionization in the liquid as well as scintillation-induced photoelectrons
from a CsI photocathode immersed in LXe. We report on initial tests (in gas) of
THGEM made out of Cirlex (Kapton) which is well known to have low Ra-Th content
instead of the usual G10 material with high Ra-Th content.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This is the reply to `COMMENT ON ``HELMHOLTZ THEOREM AND THE V-GAUGE IN THE
PROBLEM OF SUPERLUMINAL AND INSTANTANEOUS SIGNALS IN CLASSICAL ELECTRODYNAMICS"
BY A. CHUBYKALO ET AL' BY J. A. HERAS [FOUND. PHYS. LETT. vol. 19(6) p. 579
(2006)]

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: We propose an analysis of the dead time losses in counting imaging detectors
such as MWPC which can resolve $k$ simultaneous hits, and analyze in more
detail an $X-Y$ detector which has a third wire set which allows for the
recognition of simultaneous impacts.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: Likely candidates for the global potential energy minima of (H$_{2}$O)$_{n}$
clusters with $n\leq21$ on the (0001)-surface of graphite are found using
basin-hopping global optimization. The potential energy surfaces are
constructed using the TIP4P intermolecular potentials for the water molecules
(the TIP3P is also explored as a secondary choice), a Lennard-Jones
water-graphite potential, and a water-graphite polarization potential that is
built from classical electrostatic image methods and takes into account both
the perpendicular and parallel electric polarizations of graphite. This
potential energy surface produces a rather hydrophobic water-graphite
interaction. As a consequence, the water component of the lowest
graphite-(H$_{2}$O)$_{n}$ minima is quite closely related to low-lying minima
of the corresponding TIP4P (H$_{2}$O)$_{n}$ clusters. In about half of the
cases the geometrical substructure of the water molecules in the
graphite-(H$_{2}$O)$_{n}$ global minimum coincides with that of the
corresponding free water cluster. Exceptions occur when the interaction with
graphite induces a change in geometry. A comparison of our results with
available theoretical and experimental data is performed.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The classification of earthquakes in main shocks and aftershocks by a method
recently proposed by M. Baiesi and M. Paczuski allows to the generation of a
complex network composed of clusters that group the most correlated events. The
spatial distribution of epicentres inside these structures corresponding to the
catalogue of earthquakes in the eastern region of Cuba shows anomalous
anti-diffusive behaviour evidencing the attractive nature of the main shock and
the possible description in terms of fractional kinetics.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, astro-ph
Abstract: The problem of two-dimensional steady nonlinear dynamics in plane Couette
flow is revisited using homotopy from either plane Poiseuille flow or from
plane Couette flow perturbed by a small symmetry-preserving identity operator.
Our results show that it is not possible to obtain the nonlinear plane Couette
flow solutions reported by Cherhabili and Ehrenstein [Eur. J. Mech. B/Fluids,
14, 667 (1995)] using their Poiseuille-Couette homotopy. We also demonstrate
that the steady solutions obtained by Mehta and Healey [Phys. Fluids, 17, 4108
(2005)] for small symmetry-preserving perturbations are influenced by an
artefact of the modified system of equations used in their paper. However,
using a modified version of their model does not help to find plane Couette
flow solution in the limit of vanishing symmetry-preserving perturbations
either. The issue of the existence of two-dimensional nonlinear steady states
in plane Couette flow remains unsettled.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We have realized a two dimensional permanent magnetic lattice of
Ioffe-Pritchard microtraps for ultracold atoms. The lattice is formed by a
single 300 nm magnetized layer of FePt, patterned using optical lithography.
Our magnetic lattice consists of more than 15000 tightly confining microtraps
with a density of 1250 traps/mm$^2$. Simple analytical approximations for the
magnetic fields produced by the lattice are used to derive relevant trap
parameters. We load ultracold atoms into at least 30 lattice sites at a
distance of approximately 10 $\mu$m from the film surface. The present result
is an important first step towards quantum information processing with neutral
atoms in magnetic lattice potentials.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The use of photonic crystal fibers pumped by femtosecond pulses has enabled
the generation of broad optical supercontinua with nano-joule input energies.
This striking discovery has applications ranging from spectroscopy and
metrology to telecommunication and medicine. Amongst the physical principles
underlying supercontinuum generation are soliton fission, a variety of
four-wave mixing processes, Raman induced soliton self-frequency shift, and
dispersive wave generation mediated by solitons. Although all of the above
effects contribute to supercontinuum generation none of them can explain the
generation of blue and violet light from infrared femtosecond pump pulses,
which has been seen already in the first observations of the supercontinuum in
photonic crystal fibers. In this work we argue that the most profound role in
the shaping of the short-wavelength edge of the continuum is played by the
effect of radiation trapping in a gravity-like potential created by
accelerating solitons. The underlying physics of this effect has a
straightforward analogy with the inertial forces acting on an observer moving
with a constant acceleration.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The elementary processes taking place in the formation of charged particles
and their flow in the ionization chamber are considered. On the basic of
particles and charges balance a differential equation describing the
distribution of current densities in the ionization chamber volume is obtained.
As a result of the differential equation solution an analytical form of the
current-voltage characteristic of a parallel-plane ionization chamber is
obtained.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: An investigation of the possible inflation of stimulated Brillouin
backscattering (SBS) due to ion kinetic effects is presented using
electromagnetic particle simulations and integrations of three-wave
coupled-mode equations with linear and nonlinear models of the nonlinear ion
physics. Electrostatic simulations of linear ion Landau damping in an ion
acoustic wave, nonlinear reduction of damping due to ion trapping, and
nonlinear frequency shifts due to ion trapping establish a baseline for
modeling the electromagnetic SBS simulations. Systematic scans of the laser
intensity have been undertaken with both one-dimensional particle simulations
and coupled-mode-equations integrations, and two values of the electron-to-ion
temperature ratio (to vary the linear ion Landau damping) are considered. Three
of the four intensity scans have evidence of SBS inflation as determined by
observing more reflectivity in the particle simulations than in the
corresponding three-wave mode-coupling integrations with a linear ion-wave
model, and the particle simulations show evidence of ion trapping.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In this manuscript we analyse the leading statistical properties of
fluctuations of (log) 3-month US Treasury bill quotation in the secondary
market, namely: probability density function, autocorrelation, absolute values
autocorrelation, and absolute values persistency. We verify that this financial
instrument, in spite of its high liquidity, shows very peculiar properties.
Particularly, we verify that log-fluctuations belong to the Levy class of
stochastic variables.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: It is proved that local Lorentz transformations for different systems cannot
derive varying speed of light. Based on the special relativity principle, an
invariant speed is necessarily obtained. Therefore, the exact basic principles
of the special relativity should be redefined as: I. The special relativity
principle, which derives necessarily an invariant speed. II. Suppose that the
invariant speed in the theory is the speed of light in the vacuum c. If the
second principle does not hold, for example, the superluminal motions exist,
the theory will be still the extensive special relativity, in which the
formulations are the same, only c is replaced by the invariant speed. If the
invariant speed are various invariant velocities, the diversity of space-time
will correspond to many worlds. Varying speed of light theory is probably
connected only with the general relativity.

Categories: physics.ed-ph
Abstract: The reaction time of a group of students majoring in Physics is reported
here. Strong co-relation between fatigue, reaction time and performance have
been seen and may be useful for academicians and administrators responsible of
working out time-tables, course structures, students counsellings etc.

Categories: physics.hist-ph
Abstract: The possible existence of astronomical references in the planning of the
so-called Great Hopewell Road, a 90 Kilometres straight road composed of two
parallel earthen embankments which, according to recent surveys, likely
connected the Hopewell ceremonial centres of Newark and Chillicothe, Ohio, are
investigated. It turns out that a very peculiar, although simple, set of
astronomical alignments took place in connection with the road during possible
periods of its construction. The possibility of a non-fortuitous connection is
thus proposed and analysed.

Categories: q-bio.PE, astro-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Lieberman and Melott built their recent arXiv preprint 0704.2896 on my
published paper and (a preprint of) a subsequent comment by Liebermans
associate Cornette. But had this group waited for the Cornette comment to
actually appear in print together with the expected Reply, they would have
learned that his comment exposes Cornettes confusion that likely was due to
journal misprint of my figure. Thus 0704.2896 is baseless. Despite receiving
the extended Reply with Errata, these authors still fail to recognize that
detrending of paleontological records-which they erroneously promote as a
must-is an arbitrary rather than a universal operation.

Categories: nlin.CD, astro-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The fate of aerosols in open flows is relevant in a variety of physical
contexts. Previous results are consistent with the assumption that such
finite-size particles always escape in open chaotic advection. Here we show
that a different behavior is possible. We analyze the dynamics of aerosols both
in the absence and presence of gravitational effects, and both when the
dynamics of the fluid particles is hyperbolic and nonhyperbolic. Permanent
trapping of aerosols much heavier than the advecting fluid is shown to occur in
all these cases. This phenomenon is determined by the occurrence of multiple
vortices in the flow and is predicted to happen for realistic particle-fluid
density ratios.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Water is necessary both for the evolution of life and its continuance. It
possesses particular properties that cannot be found in other materials and
that are required for life-giving processes. These properties are brought about
by the hydrogen bonded environment particularly evident in liquid water. Each
liquid water molecule is involved in about four hydrogen bonds with strengths
considerably less than covalent bonds but considerably greater than the natural
thermal energy. These hydrogen bonds are roughly tetrahedrally arranged such
that when strongly formed the local clustering expands, decreasing the density.
Such low density structuring naturally occurs at low and supercooled
temperatures and gives rise to many physical and chemical properties that
evidence the particular uniqueness of liquid water. If aqueous hydrogen bonds
were actually somewhat stronger then water would behave similar to a glass,
whereas if they were weaker then water would be a gas and only exist as a
liquid at sub-zero temperatures. The overall conclusion of this investigation
is that water's hydrogen bond strength is poised centrally within a narrow
window of its suitability for life.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: This paper, which commented on Newman and Leicht's "Mixture models and
exploratory analysis in networks" (2007, PNAS 104, 9564-9569), has been
withdrawn. The reason for this removal is that we misinterpreted the conceptual
framework that the authors of the original paper use. Specifically, it is
assumed in our paper that the variable theta_ri denotes the *a priori*
probability that there exists an edge from group r to vertex i. The correct
interpretation is that theta_ri denotes the probability that a given edge from
group r connects to vertex i.
  We are very grateful to Mark Newman and Elizabeth Leicht not only for
pointing out our misinterpretation, but also for doing it so politely and
gracefully.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The solution of a boundary-value problem formulated for a modified
Kretschmann configuration shows that a surface-plasmon wave can be excited at
the planar interface of a sufficiently thin metal film and a nondissipative
structurally chiral medium, provided the exciting plane wave is p-polarized. An
estimate of the wavenumber of the surface-plasmon wave also emerges thereby.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: In this paper a new method for spotsize-measurement for singlemode optical
components is presented. Based from the classical farfield-method where the
measurements are made circular, the mounting of the used rotary stages and the
long measurement time are great disadvantages. In this paper a new planar
method is described which overcomes these problems. Based on the measurement of
a singlemode fiber in accordance with ITU Recommendation G.652 the efficiency
is demonstrated and discussed.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The demand for high-speed digital communication such as data, video, and the
broadband Internet increases, the required throughput of the modules in
communications systems will also increase. In this paper we present an
instruction system, which works on the basis of a wavelength division multiplex
(WDM) system in the visible spectrum. It is specialised for the academic
training at universities to demonstrate the principles of the WDM techniques.
It works platform independent in combination with active modules in the
training description, short inline videos and interactive diagrams. The system
consists of LEDs in different wavelengths using analog and digital signals.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: A numerical hydrodynamic study of femtosecond laser ablation is presented. A
detailed analysis of material decomposition is performed using a
thermodynamically complete equation of state with separate stable and
metastable phase states and phase boundaries. The lifetime of the metastable
liquid state is estimated based on the classical theory of homogeneous
nucleation. In addition, mechanical fragmentation of the target material is
controlled based on available criteria. As a result, several ablation
mechanisms are observed. A major fraction of the ablated material, however, is
found to originate from the metastable liquid region, which is decomposed
either thermally in the vicinity of the critical point into a liquid-gas
mixture, or mechanically at high strain rate and negative pressure into liquid
droplets and chunks. The calculation results explain available experimental
findings.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: For some time now, we have been using a FRET-based strategy to make
high-resolution studies of phase behavior in ternary lipid-raft membrane
mixtures. Our FRET experiments can be carried out on ordinary, polydisperse
multilamellar vesicle suspensions, so we are able to prepare our samples
according to a procedure that was designed specifically to guard against
artifactual phase separation. In some respects (i.e., the number and nature of
two-phase regions observed), our phase diagrams are consistent with previously
published reports. However, in other respects (i.e., overall size of
miscibility gaps, phase boundary locations and their dependence on temperature)
there are clear differences. Here we present FRET data taken in
DOPC/DPPC/Cholesterol mixtures at 25.0, 35.0 and 45.0oC. Comparisons between
our results and previously reported phase boundaries suggest that lipid-raft
mixtures may be particularly susceptible to demixing effects during sample
preparation.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: The asymptotic behavior of the molecular continuum wave function has been
analyzed within a model of non-overlapping atomic potentials. It is been shown
that the representation of the wave function far from a molecule as a plane
wave and single spherical wave emitted by the molecular center cannot be
corrected. Because of the multicenter character of the problem, the asymptotic
form of the wave function must contain N spherical waves with centers at the
nuclei of the N atoms that form the molecule. A method of partial waves for a
spherically non-symmetrical target is considered for the simplest multicenter
target formed by two non-overlapping potentials. The results are compared with
those obtained within the single spherical wave approximation. It has been
shown that the use of this approximation results in significant mistakes in
differential and total cross sections of electron elastic scattering by a
target.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: This works reports on gaseous detectors developments made in the frame of the
EXO double-beta decay experiment. LEM (Large Electron Multiplication) are
electron amplification grids based on GEM. They were developed in Neuchatel and
showed remarquable resistance to sparks. The new SILEM grid combines the
properties of the standard LEM with a micropatterned x-y readout plane on one
of the grid side. It allows thus the amplification of the primary electrons and
their position determination in the x-y plane.

Categories: physics.med-ph, physics.data-an
Abstract: In this paper, we model a nonlinear dynamics of infectious diseases transfer.
Particularly, we study possible applications to tubercular infection in models
with different profiles (peak values) of the population density dependence on
spatial coordinates. Our approach is based on the well known method of
instantons which has been used by the authors to describe kinetics of adiabatic
chemical reactions as a function of the heat-bath temperature and other system
parameters. In our approach, we use "social temperature" T as one of the
controlling parameters. Increase of T leads to acceleration of the infectious
diseases transfer. The "blockage" effect for the infectious diseases transfer
has been demonstrated in the case when peak values (in the population density)
are equal to one and under condition that the "social temperature" is low.
Existence of such effect essentially depends from environment "activity"
(social and prophylactic). Results of our modeling qualitatively meet the
tuberculosis dynamic spread data in Penza region of Russia.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We analyze the time resolved spike statistics of a solitary and two mutually
interacting chaotic semiconductor lasers whose chaos is characterized by
apparently random, short intensity spikes. Repulsion between two successive
spikes is observed, resulting in a refractory period which is largest at laser
threshold. For time intervals between spikes greater than the refractory
period, the distribution of the intervals follows a Poisson distribution. The
spiking pattern is highly periodic over time windows corresponding to the
optical length of the external cavity, with a slow change of the spiking
pattern as time increases. When zero-lag synchronization between the two lasers
is established, the statistics of the nearly perfectly matched spikes are not
altered. The similarity of these features to those found in complex interacting
neural networks, suggests the use of laser systems as simpler physical models
for neural networks.

Categories: q-fin.GN, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: There are clear benefits associated with a particular consumer choice for
many current markets. For example, as we consider here, some products might
carry environmental or `green' benefits. Some consumers might value these
benefits while others do not. However, as evidenced by myriad failed attempts
of environmental products to maintain even a niche market, such benefits do not
necessarily outweigh the extra purchasing cost. The question we pose is, how
can such an initially economically-disadvantaged green product evolve to hold
the greater share of the market? We present a simple mathematical model for the
dynamics of product competition in a heterogeneous consumer population. Our
model preassigns a hierarchy to the products, which designates the consumer
choice when prices are comparable, while prices are dynamically rescaled to
reflect increasing returns to scale. Our approach allows us to model many
scenarios of technology substitution and provides a method for generalizing
market forces. With this model, we begin to forecast irreversible trends
associated with consumer dynamics as well as policies that could be made to
influence transitions

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We report on a study of the Tehran Price Index (TEPIX) from 2001 to 2006 as
an emerging market that has been affected by several political crises during
the recent years, and analyze the non-Gaussian probability density function
(PDF) of the log returns of the stocks' prices. We show that while the average
of the index did not fall very much over the time period of the study, its
day-to-day fluctuations strongly increased due to the crises. Using an approach
based on multiplicative processes with a detrending procedure, we study the
scale-dependence of the non-Gaussian PDFs, and show that the temporal
dependence of their tails indicates a gradual and systematic increase in the
probability of the appearance of large increments in the returns on approaching
distinct critical time scales over which the TEPIX has exhibited maximum
uncertainty.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We generalize the concept of nonlinear periodic structures to systems that
show arbitrary spacetime variations of the refractive index. Nonlinear pulse
propagation through these spatiotemporal photonic crystals can be described,
for shallow nonstationary gratings, by coupled mode equations which are a
generalization of the traditional equations used for stationary photonic
crystals. Novel gap soliton solutions are found by solving a modified massive
Thirring model. They represent the missing link between the gap solitons in
static photonic crystals and resonance solitons found in dynamic gratings.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Two recent studies have presented new information relevant to the transition
from quantum behavior to classical behavior, and related this to parameters
characterizing the universe as a whole. The present study based on a separate
approach has developed similar results that appear to substantiate aspects of
earlier work and also to introduce further new ideas.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, math-ph, math.MP
Abstract: We study a mean-field relativistic model which is able to describe both the
behavior of finitely many spin-1/2 particles like electrons and of the Dirac
sea which is self-consistently polarized in the presence of the real particles.
The model is derived from the QED Hamiltonian in Coulomb gauge neglecting the
photon field. All our results are non-perturbative and mathematically rigorous.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, cond-mat.soft, q-bio.BM
Abstract: The influence of three well-known disaccharides, namely trehalose, maltose
and sucrose, on some structural and dynamical properties of lysozyme has been
investigated by means of molecular dynamics computer simulations in the 37-60
wt % concentration range. The effects of sugars on the protein conformation are
found relatively weak, in agreement with the preferential hydration of
lysozyme. Conversely, sugars seem to increase significantly the relaxation
times of the protein. These effects are shown to be correlated to the
fractional solvent accessibilities of lysozyme residues and further support the
slaving of protein dynamics. Moreover, a significant increase in the relaxation
times of lysozyme, sugars and water molecules is observed within the studied
concentration range and may result from the percolation of the hydrogen-bond
network of sugar molecules. This percolation appears to be of primary
importance to explain the influence of sugars on the dynamical properties of
lysozyme and water.

Categories: physics.atm-clus
Abstract: This is an investigation on the dynamical screening of an atom confined
within a fullerene of finite width. The two surfaces of the fullerene lead to
the presence of two surface plasmon eigenmodes. It is shown that, in the
vicinity of these two eigenfrequencies, there is a large enhancement of the
confined atom's photoabsorption rate.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We present a detailed study of soliton compression of ultra-short pulses
based on phase-mismatched second-harmonic generation (\textit{i.e.}, the
cascaded quadratic nonlinearity) in bulk quadratic nonlinear media. The
single-cycle propagation equations in the temporal domain including
higher-order nonlinear terms are presented. The balance between the quadratic
(SHG) and the cubic (Kerr) nonlinearity plays a crucial role: we define an
effective soliton number -- related to the difference between the SHG and the
Kerr soliton numbers -- and show that it has to be larger than unity for
successful pulse compression to take place. This requires that the phase
mismatch be below a critical level, which is high in a material where the
quadratic nonlinearity dominates over the cubic Kerr nonlinearity. Through
extensive numerical simulations we find dimensionless scaling laws, expressed
through the effective soliton number, which control the behaviour of the
compressed pulses. These laws hold in the stationary regime, in which
group-velocity mismatch effects are small, and they are similar to the ones
observed for fiber soliton compressors. The numerical simulations indicate that
clean compressed pulses below two optical cycles can be achieved in a
$\beta$-barium borate crystal at appropriate wavelengths, even for picosecond
input pulses.

Categories: physics.optics, nlin.PS
Abstract: We predict that the interface of materials with defocusing thermal
nonlinearities support stable fundamental and higher-order surface waves when
the opposite edges of the medium are maintained at different temperatures. Such
surface waves exist due to the interplay between repulsion from the interface
and the defocusing thermal nonlinearity that deflect light beams from the bulk
of the medium toward its edges.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, astro-ph
Abstract: We have measured the reduced absorption coefficients occurring in the wings
of the potassium 4S-5P doublet lines at 404.414 nm and at 404.720 nm broadened
by helium gas at pressures of several hundred Torr. At the experimental
temperature of 900 K, we have detected a shoulder-like broadening feature on
the blue wing of the doublet which is relatively flat between 401.8 nm and
402.8 nm and which drops off rapidly for shorter wavelengths, corresponding to
absorption from the X doublet Sigma+ state to the C doublet Sigma+ state of the
K-He quasimolecule. The accurate measurements of the line profiles in the
present work will sharply constrain future calculations of potential energy
surfaces and transition dipole moments correlating to the asymptotes He-K(5p),
He-K(5s), and He-K(3d).

Categories: astro-ph, gr-qc, hep-ph, hep-th, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: We review the current standard model for the evolution of the Universe from
an early inflationary epoch to the complex hierarchy of structure seen today.
We summarize and provide key references for the following topics: observations
of the expanding Universe; the hot early Universe and nucleosynthesis; theory
and observations of the cosmic microwave background; Big Bang cosmology;
inflation; dark matter and dark energy; theory of structure formation; the cold
dark matter model; galaxy formation; cosmological simulations; observations of
galaxies, clusters, and quasars; statistical measures of large-scale structure;
and measurement of cosmological parameters. We conclude with discussion of some
open questions in cosmology. This review is designed to provide a graduate
student or other new worker in the field an introduction to the cosmological
literature.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.ins-det
Abstract: A femtosecond frequency comb provides a vast number of equidistantly spaced
narrow band laser modes that can be simultaneously tuned and frequency
calibrated with 15 digits accuracy. Our Vernier spectrometer utilizes all of
theses modes in a massively parallel manner to rapidly record both absorption
and dispersion spectra with a sensitivity that is provided by a high finesse
broad band optical resonator and a resolution that is only limited by the
frequency comb line width while keeping the required setup simple.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Special relativity turns out to be more than coordinate transformations in
which the constancy of the speed of light plays the central role between two
inertial reference frames. Special relativity, in essence, is a theory of
four-dimensional flat spacetime. Euclidian space spans three of the spacetime's
dimensions and time spans the fourth. Properties of light may not be needed to
describe spacetime, which exists independently of light. The article shows that
a theory of spacetime can be constructed from a geometric viewpoint in which
the speed of light does not play any role. Moreover postulating
four-dimensional geometry significantly simplifies the concept of special
relativity.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report the observation of high order resonances of the quantum
$\delta$-kicked accelerator using a BEC kicked by a standing wave of light. The
signature of these resonances is the existence of quantum accelerator modes.
For the first time quantum accelerator modes were seen near 1/4 and 1/3 of the
Talbot time. Using a BEC enabled us to study the detailed structure of the
modes and resonances which are related to the fractional Talbot effect. We
present a general theory for this system and apply it to predict the behavior
of the accelerator modes.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: Dose volume histograms are a useful tool in state-of-the-art radiotherapy
planning, and it is essential to be aware of their limitations. Dose
distributions computed by treatment planning systems are affected by several
sources of uncertainty such as algorithm limitations, measurement uncertainty
in the data used to model the beam and residual differences between measured
and computed dose, once the model is optimized. In order to take into account
the effect of uncertainty, a probabilistic approach is proposed and a new kind
of histogram, a dose-expected volume histogram, is introduced. The expected
value of the volume in the region of interest receiving an absorbed dose equal
or greater than a certain value is found using the probability distribution of
the dose at each point. A rectangular probability distribution is assumed for
this point dose, and a relationship is given for practical computations. This
method is applied to a set of dose volume histograms for different regions of
interest for 6 brain patients, 8 lung patients, 8 pelvis patients and 6
prostate patients planned for IMRT. These results show how dose computation
uncertainty has effects on PTV coverage and, to a lesser extent, in dose to
organs at risk. This method allows to quantify these effects.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report the laser-cooling and confinement of Cd atoms in a magneto-optical
trap, and characterize the loading process from the background Cd vapor. The
trapping laser drives the 1S0-1P1 transition at 229 nm in this two-electron
atom and also photoionizes atoms directly from the 1P1 state. This
photoionization overwhelms the other loss mechanisms and allows a direct
measurement of the photoionization cross section, which we measure to be
2(1)x10^(-16)cm^(2) from the 1P1 state. When combined with nearby laser-cooled
and trapped Cd^(+) ions, this apparatus could facilitate studies in ultracold
interactions between atoms and ions.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech
Abstract: We study the dynamics and resulting score distribution of three-agent games
where after each competition a single agent wins and scores a point. A single
competition is described by a triplet of numbers $p$, $t$ and $q$ denoting the
probabilities that the team with the highest, middle or lowest accumulated
score wins. We study the full family of solutions in the regime, where the
number of agents and competitions is large, which can be regarded as a
hydrodynamic limit. Depending on the parameter values $(p,q,t)$, we find six
qualitatively different asymptotic score distributions and we also provide a
qualitative understanding of these results. We checked our analytical results
against numerical simulations of the microscopic model and find these to be in
excellent agreement. The three agent game can be regarded as a social model
where a player can be favored or disfavored for advancement, based on his/her
accumulated score. It is also possible to decide the outcome of a three agent
game through a mini tournament of two-a gent competitions among the
participating players and it turns out that the resulting possible score
distributions are a subset of those obtained for the general three agent-games.
We discuss how one can add a steady and democratic decline rate to the model
and present a simple geometric construction that allows one to write down the
corresponding score evolution equations for $n$-agent games.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: In quantum electrodynamics, the quantitatively most successful theory in the
history of science, intercharge forces obeying the inverse square law are due
to the exchange of space-like virtual photons. The fundamental quantum process
underlying applications as diverse as the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron
and electrical machinery is then M{\o}ller scattering $ee \to ee$. Analysis of
the quantum amplitude for this process shows that the corresponding intercharge
force acts instantaneously. This prediction has been verified in a recent
experiment.

Categories: nlin.CD, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: We investigate the effects of a time-correlated noise on an extended chaotic
system. The chosen model is the Lorenz'96, a kind of "toy" model used for
climate studies. Through the analysis of the system's time evolution and its
time and space correlations, we have obtained numerical evidence for two
stochastic resonance-like behavior. Such behavior is seen when both, the usual
and a generalized signal-to-noise ratio function are depicted as a function of
the external noise intensity or the system size. The underlying mechanism seems
to be associated to a "noise-induced chaos reduction". The possible relevance
of these and other findings for an "optimal" climate prediction are discussed.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: We propose a new simple model for DNA denaturation bases on the pendulum
model of Englander\cite{A1} and the microscopic model of Peyrard {\it et
al.},\cite{A3} so called "combined model". The main parameters of our model
are: the coupling constant $k$ along each strand, the mean stretching $y^\ast$
of the hydrogen bonds, the ratio of the damping constant and driven force
$\gamma/F$. We show that both the length $L$ of unpaired bases and the velocity
$v$ of kinks depend on not only the coupling constant $k$ but also the
temperature $T$. Our results are in good agreement with previous works.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Considering the plasmon oscillation of each layer of the cell membranes as a
quasi-particle, we introduce a simple model for the membrane collective charge
excitations, take into account the surface effective potential of the
plasmon-plasmon interaction between two layers. By using the useful Bogoliubov
transformation method, we easily obtained the expressions of the frequencies of
plasmon oscillations as a function of wave-number $k$ and membrane thickness
$d$, magnitude of these frequencies is in the order of $\sqrt{kd}$. Our results
are in good agreement with ones obtained by E. Manousakis.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Using one-center expansion relations for the Slater type orbitals (STOs) of
noninteger principal quantum numbers in terms of integer n STOs derived in this
study with the help of - exponential type orbitals (-ETOs, the general formulas
are established for the unsymmetrical and symmetrical one-range addition
theorems of STOs and Coulomb-Yukawa like correlated interaction potentials
(CIPs) with integer and noninteger indices. The final results are especially
useful for computations of arbitrary multicenter multielectron integrals over
STOs that arise in the Hartree-Fock-Roothaan (HFR) approximation and also in
the correlated methods which play a significant role in theory and application
to quantum mechanics of atoms, molecules, and solids.

Categories: math.AP, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We propose a proof of convergence of an adaptive method used in molecular
dynamics to compute free energy profiles. Mathematically, it amounts to
studying the long-time behavior of a stochastic process which satisfies a
non-linear stochastic differential equation, where the drift depends on
conditional expectations of some functionals of the process. We use entropy
techniques to prove exponential convergence to the stationary state.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: The present work tests the suitability of the narrow transitions $7s \
^2S_{1/2} \to 6d ^2D_{3/2}$ and $7s ^2S_{1/2} \to 6d ^2D_{5/2}$ in Ra$^+$ for
optical frequency standard studies. Our calculations of the lifetimes of the
metastable $6d$ states using the relativistic coupled-cluster theory suggest
that they are sufficiently long for Ra$^+$ to be considered as a potential
candidate for an atomic clock. This is further corroborated by our studies of
the hyperfine interactions, dipole and quadrupole polarizabilities and
quadrupole moments of the appropriate states of this system.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: The compatibility "demonstrated" by Rovelli & al. between various "gauge
conditions" both in Classical Electromagnetism and General Relativity can be
better understood if one distinguishes "gauge conditions" of the solution type
and "gauge conditions" of the constraint type.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, physics.ins-det
Abstract: The design and characteristics of the new very small angle neutron scattering
spectrometer under construction at the Laboratoire Leon Brillouin is described.
Its goal is to extend the range of scattering vectors magnitudes towards
2x10{-4} /A. The unique feature of this new spectrometer is a high resolution
two dimensional image plate detector sensitive to neutrons. The wavelength
selection is achieved by a double reflection supermirror monochromator and the
collimator uses a novel multibeam design.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Basis set convergence of correlation effects on molecular atomization
energies beyond the CCSD (coupled cluster with singles and doubles)
approximation has been studied near the one-particle basis set limit.
Quasiperturbative connected triple excitations, (T), converge more rapidly than
$L^{-3}$ (where $L$ is the highest angular momentum represented in the basis
set), while higher-order connected triples, $T_3-(T)$, converge more slowly --
empirically, $\propto L^{-5/2}$. Quasiperturbative connected quadruple
excitations, (Q), converge smoothly as $\propto L^{-3}$ starting with the
cc-pVTZ basis set, while the cc-pVDZ basis set causes overshooting of the
contribution in highly polar systems. Higher-order connected quadruples display
only weak, but somewhat erratic, basis set dependence. Connected quintuple
excitations converge very rapidly with the basis set, to the point where even
an unpolarized double-zeta basis set yields useful numbers. In cases where
fully iterative CCSDTQ5 (coupled cluster up to connected quintuples)
calculations are not an option, CCSDTQ(5) (i.e., coupled cluster up to
connected quadruples plus a quasiperturbative connected quintuples correction)
cannot be relied upon in the presence of significant nondynamical correlation,
whereas CCSDTQ(5)$_\Lambda$ represents a viable alternative. Connected
quadruples corrections to the core-valence contribution are thermochemically
significant in some systems. [...] We conclude that ``$3\sigma\leq 1$ kJ/mol''
thermochemistry is feasible with current technology, but that the more
ambitious goal of $\pm$10 cm$^{-1}$ accuracy is illusory, at least for
atomization energies.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: We investigate the dynamics of football matches. Our goal is to characterize
statistically the temporal sequence of ball movements in this collective sport
game, searching for traits of complex behavior. Data were collected over a
variety of matches in South American, European and World championships
throughout 2005 and 2006. We show that the statistics of ball touches presents
power-law tails and can be described by $q$-gamma distributions. To explain
such behavior we propose a model that provides information on the
characteristics of football dynamics. Furthermore, we discuss the statistics of
duration of out-of-play intervals, not directly related to the previous
scenario.

Categories: physics.ins-det, hep-ex
Abstract: We give a short description of the project to install roman pot detectors at
220 m from the interaction point in ATLAS. This project is dedicated to hard
diffractive measurements at high luminosity.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The aim of these notes is to elucidate some aspects of quantum field theory
in curved spacetime, especially those relating to the notion of particles. A
selection of issues relevant to wave-particle duality is given. The case of a
generic curved spacetime is outlined. A Hamiltonian formulation of quantum
field theory in curved spacetime is elaborated for a preferred reference frame
with a separated space metric (a static spacetime and a reductive synchronous
reference frame). Applications: (1) Black hole. (2) The universe; the
cosmological redshift is obtained in the context of quantum field theory.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Mexico is one of the most volcanically active regions in North America.
Volcanic activity in central Mexico is associated with the subduction of the
Cocos and Rivera plates beneath the North American plate. Periods of enhanced
microseismic activity, associated with the volcanic activity of the
Popocatepetl volcano is compared with periods, during which the microseismic
activity was low. We detected systematical changes in the number of lineaments,
associated with the microseismic activity due to lineament analysis of a
temporal sequence of high resolution satellite images of the Popocatepetl
volcano, provided by the ASTER/VNIR instrument. The Lineament Extraction and
Stripes Statistic Analysis (LESSA) software package was used for the lineament
extraction. In the future it would allow develop a methodology for detection of
possible elevation of pressure in volcano edifice.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Relativistic many-body perturbation theory is applied to study properties of
ions of the francium isoelectronic sequence. Specifically, energies of the 7s,
7p, 6d, and 5f states of Fr-like ions with nuclear charges Z = 87 - 100 are
calculated through third order; reduced matrix elements, oscillator strengths,
transition rates, and lifetimes are determined for 7s - 7p, 7p - 6d, and 6d -
5f electric-dipole transitions; and 7s - 6d, 7s - 5f, and 5f_5/2 - 5f_7/2
multipole matrix elements are evaluated to obtain the lifetimes of low-lying
excited states. Moreover, for the ions Z = 87 - 92 calculations are also
carried out using the relativistic all-order single-double method, in which
single and double excitations of Dirac-Fock wave functions are included to all
orders in perturbation theory. With the aid of the SD wave functions, we obtain
accurate values of energies, transition rates, oscillator strengths, and the
lifetimes of these six ions. Ground state scalar polarizabilities in Fr I, Ra
II, Ac III, and Th IV are calculated using relativistic third-order and
all-order methods. Ground state scalar polarizabilities for other Fr-like ions
are calculated using a relativistic second-order method. These calculations
provide a theoretical benchmark for comparison with experiment and theory.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We demonstrate superradiant conversion between a two-mode collective atomic
state and a single-mode light field in an elongated cloud of Bose-condensed
atoms. Two off-resonant write beams induce superradiant Raman scattering,
producing two independent coherence gratings with a different wave vector in
the cloud. By applying phase-matched read beams after a controllable delay, the
gratings can be selectively converted into the light field also in a
superradiant way. Due to the large cooperativity parameter and the small
velocity width of the condensate, a high conversion efficiency of $> 70$ % and
a long storage time of $> 120$ $\mu$s were achieved.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Over the last decades strong efforts have been made to apply new spaceborn
technologies to the study and possible forecast of strong earthquakes. In this
study we use ASTER/TERRA multispectral satellite images for detection and
analysis of changes in the system of lineaments previous to a strong
earthquake. A lineament is a straight or a somewhat curved feature in an image,
which it is possible to detect by a special processing of images based on
directional filtering and or Hough transform. "The Lineament Extraction and
Stripes Statistic Analysis" (LESSA) software package, developed by Zlatopolsy
(1992, 1997). We assume that the lineaments allow to detect, at least
partially, the presence ruptures in the Earths crust, and therefore enable one
to follow the changes in the system of faults and fractures associated with
strong earthquakes. We analysed 6 earthquakes occurred in the Pacific coast of
the South America and XXX with the Richter scale magnitude >4.5. They were
located in the regions with small seasonal variations and limited vegetation to
facilitate the tracking of features associated with the seismic activity only.
It was found that the number and orientation of lineaments changed
significantly about one month before an earthquake approximately, and a few
months later the system returns to its initial state. This effect increases
with the earthquake magnitude, and it is much more easily detectable in case of
convergent plate boundaries (for example, Nasca and South American plates). The
results obtained open a possibility to develop a methodology able to evaluate
the seismic risk in the regions with similar geological conditions.

Categories: physics.optics, cond-mat.mes-hall
Abstract: Photoluminescence spectroscopy of single InAs quantum dots at cryogenic
temperatures (~14 K) is performed using a micron-scale optical fiber taper
waveguide as a near-field optic. The measured collection efficiency of quantum
dot spontaneous emission into the fundamental guided mode of the fiber taper is
estimated at 0.1%, and spatially-resolved measurements with ~600 nm resolution
are obtained by varying the taper position with respect to the sample and using
the fiber taper for both the pump and collection channels.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, q-fin.GN
Abstract: A general theory of innovation and progress in human society is outlined,
based on the combat between two opposite forces (conservatism/inertia and
speculative herding "bubble" behavior). We contend that human affairs are
characterized by ubiquitous ``bubbles'', which involve huge risks which would
not otherwise be taken using standard cost/benefit analysis. Bubbles result
from self-reinforcing positive feedbacks. This leads to explore uncharted
territories and niches whose rare successes lead to extraordinary discoveries
and provide the base for the observed accelerating development of technology
and of the economy. But the returns are very heterogeneous, very risky and may
not occur. In other words, bubbles, which are characteristic definitions of
human activity, allow huge risks to get huge returns over large scales. We
outline some underlying mathematical structure and a few results involving
positive feedbacks, emergence, heavy-tailed power laws, outliers/kings/black
swans, the problem of predictability and the illusion of control, as well as
some policy implications.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: An earlier study (Nettle 1999b) concluded, based on computer simulations and
some inferences from empirical data, that languages will change the more slowly
the larger the population gets. We replicate this study using a more complete
language model for simulations (the Schulze model combined with a
Barabasi-Albert net- work) and a richer empirical dataset (the World Atlas of
Language Structures edited by Haspelmath et al. 2005). Our simulations show
either a weak or stronger dependence of language change on population sizes
depending on the parameter settings, and empirical data, like some of the
simulations, show a weak dependence.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: This paper reports the realization of a 5 MHz frequency difference x10
pre-multiplier, developed in the laboratory to replace an obsolete one. The
principle we chose is to synthesize a 45 MHz and a 50 MHz from a reference
signal and from the signal to be measured, and to subtract one to the other to
generate a 5 MHz, whose precision on the measurement is increased by a factor
10. Obtained Allan variance &#61555;y(&#61556;) at 1 s is 5.10-14 and output
spectral density of phase noise floor is about -160 dBc/Hz at 5 MHz.

Categories: cond-mat.other, astro-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, cond-mat.str-el, gr-qc, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The pole of the two-particle T-matrix including the influence of the
surrounding medium is analyzed for an interacting Bose gas. The phase diagram
of the Bose -Einstein condensation (BEC) depending on the temperature, density,
scattering length, and momentum is derived from this pole. The critical
momentum for the occurrence of superfluidity is obtained in this way. As a new
observation a two- particle binding energy is reported intimately connected
with the occurrence of the BEC. It is suggested that this might have
cosmological consequences on the dark energy problem.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: High-stability quartz oscillators are needed in a number of space
applications. A short-term stability of parts in 10^{-14} [Allan deviation
\sigma y(\tau) ] is sometimes required, for integration time \tau of
approximately 1-10 s. The Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the
FEMTO-ST Institute (formerly LPMO and LCEP), have been collaborating for many
years in this domain, aiming at measuring and at understanding the oscillator
noise. The highest stability has been observed on 5 MHz and 10 MHz bulk
acoustic-wave resonators. Yet this stability is still not sufficient, or the
the manufacturing method is not reproducible. Recently, the analysis of a few
premium-stability oscillators has demonstrated that the oscillator frequency
instability is due to the fluctuation of the resonator natural frequency,
rather than to the noise of the sustaining amplifier via the Leeson effect. It
is therefore natural to give attention to the measurement of the resonator
fluctuations.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, math-ph, math.AP, math.MP, nlin.SI
Abstract: In this paper, we introduce a method of imposing asymmetric conditions on the
velocity vector with respect to independent variables and a method of moving
frame for solving the three dimensional Navier-Stokes equations. Seven families
of non-steady rotating asymmetric solutions with various parameters are
obtained. In particular, one family of solutions blow up at any point on a
moving plane with a line deleted, which may be used to study turbulence. Using
Fourier expansion and two families of our solutions, one can obtain
discontinuous solutions that may be useful in study of shock waves. Another
family of solutions are partially cylindrical invariant, contain two parameter
functions of $t$ and structurally depend on two arbitrary polynomials, which
may be used to describe incompressible fluid in a nozzle. Most of our solutions
are globally analytic with respect to spacial variables.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, math-ph, math.AP, math.MP, nlin.SI
Abstract: In this paper, we use various ansatzes with undetermined functions and the
technique of moving frame to find solutions with parameter functions modulo the
Lie point symmetries for the classical non-steady boundary layer problems.
These parameter functions enable one to find the solutions of some related
practical models and boundary value problems.

Categories: cond-mat.other, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: Spatiotemporal correlations of the two-dimensional spring-block
(Burridge-Knopoff) model of earthquakes are extensively studied by means of
numerical computer simulations. The model is found to exhibit either
``subcritical'' or ``supercritical'' behavior, depending on the values of the
model parameters. Transition between these regimes is either continuous or
discontinuous. Seismic events in the ``subcritical'' regime and those in the
``supercritical'' regime at larger magnitudes exhibit universal scaling
properties. In the ``supercritical'' regime, eminent spatiotemporal
correlations, {\it e.g.}, remarkable growth of seismic activity preceding the
mainshock, arise in earthquake occurrence, whereas such spatiotemporal
correlations are significantly suppressed in the ``subcritical'' regime.
Seismic activity is generically suppressed just before the mainshock in a close
vicinity of the epicenter of the upcoming event while it remains to be active
in the surroundings (the Mogi doughnut). It is also observed that, before and
after the mainshock, the apparent $B$-value of the magnitude distribution
decreases or increases in the ``supercritical'' or ``subcritical'' regimes,
respectively. Such distinct precursory phenomena may open a way to the
prediction of the upcoming large event.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: This paper reports main results of the phase noise comparison that has been
performed between october 2005 and december 2006, using two oscillators at 5
and 100 MHz and un DRO at 3.5 GHz. The problem is not to compare the
performances of several oscillators, but to compare and to make an evaluation
of the uncertainties, and of course the resolution and the reproducibility of
the measurements. This comparison allow us to determine the ability to get
various systems traceable together in order to increase the trust that one can
have in phase noise measurements.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: The combination of ultra-cold atomic clouds with the light fields of optical
cavities provides a powerful model system for the development of new types of
laser cooling and for studying cooperative phenomena. These experiments
critically depend on the precise tuning of an incident pump laser with respect
to a cavity resonance. Here, we present a simple and reliable experimental
tuning scheme based on a two-mode laser spectrometer. The scheme uses a first
laser for probing higher-order transversal modes of the cavity having an
intensity minimum near the cavity's optical axis, where the atoms are confined
by a magnetic trap. In this way the cavity resonance is observed without
exposing the atoms to unwanted radiation pressure. A second laser, which is
phase-locked to the first one and tuned close to a fundamental cavity mode
drives the coherent atom-field dynamics.

Categories: q-bio.MN, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.CB, q-bio.SC
Abstract: Recent studies have reported that T cells can integrate signals between
interrupted encounters with Antigen Presenting Cells (APCs) in such a way that
the process of signal integration exhibits a form of memory. Here, we carry out
a computational study using a simple mathematical model of T cell activation to
investigate the ramifications of interrupted T cell-APC contacts on signal
integration. We consider several mechanisms of how signal integration at these
time scales may be achieved and conclude that feedback control of immediate
early gene products (IEGs) appears to be a highly plausible mechanism that
allows for effective signal integration and cytokine production from multiple
exposures to APCs. Analysis of these computer simulations provides an
experimental roadmap involving several testable predictions.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In this paper, we investigate an alternative formulation for spin 3/2 field
equation. First we will review equation of motion of Dirac and Maxwell, and
then construct the equation for spin 3/2 in the similar fashion. Our method
actually a generalization of relativistic equation of motion based on spin
operator and Hamiltonian similar to Dirac and Maxwell equation in ref. [1] pp.
50. Furthermore, we could not bring the equation to the Klein Gordon limit for
every wave function component in spin 3/2 formalism.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We theoretically demonstrate the formation of different kinds of
two-dimensional split-ring arrays in both triangular and square lattices by
one-step holographic interference. The slit width of the split-ring can be
adjusted by proper polarization configurations. The dimension of the rings can
be adjusted easily by using different wavelengths for interference, so the
resonant frequency of the split-rings can be obtained in a wide range. Our
theory is also proved in experiment. Our work would extend the application of
holographic lithography to the fabrication of magnetic metamaterials.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In a non supervised Bayesian estimation approach for inverse problems in
imaging systems, one tries to estimate jointly the unknown image pixels $\fb$
and the hyperparameters $\thetab$. This is, in general, done through the joint
posterior law $p(\fb,\thetab|\gb)$. The expression of this joint law is often
very complex and its exploration through sampling and computation of the point
estimators such as MAP and posterior means need either optimization of non
convex criteria or int\'egration of non Gaussian and multi variate probability
laws. In any of these cases, we need to do approximations. We had explored
before the possibilities of Laplace approximation and sampling by MCMC. In this
paper, we explore the possibility of approximating this joint law by a
separable one in $\fb$ and in $\thetab$. This gives the possibility of
developing iterative algorithms with more reasonable computational cost, in
particular, if the approximating laws are choosed in the exponential conjugate
families. The main objective of this paper is to give details of different
algorithms we obtain with different choices of these families.

Categories: nlin.CD, nlin.PS, physics.flu-dyn, physics.med-ph
Abstract: It has been reported that traveling waves propagate periodically and stably
in sub-excitable systems driven by noise [Phys. Rev. Lett. \textbf{88}, 138301
(2002)]. As a further investigation, here we observe different types of
traveling waves under different noises and periodic forces, using a simplified
Oregonator model. Depending on different noises and periodic forces, we have
observed different types of wave propagation (or their disappearance).
Moreover, the reversal phenomena are observed in this system based on the
numerical experiments in the one-dimensional space. As an explanation, we
regard it as the effect of periodic forces. Thus, we give qualitative
explanations to how reversal phenomena stably appear, which seem to arise from
the mixing function of the periodic force and the noise. And the output period
and three velocities (the normal, the positive and the negative) of the
travelling waves are defined and their relationship with the periodic forces,
along with the types of waves, are also studied in sub-excitable system under a
fixed noise intensity.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: A general Hamiltonian theory for the adiabatic motion of relativistic charged
particles confined by slowly-varying background electromagnetic fields is
presented based on a unified Lie-transform perturbation analysis in extended
phase space (which includes energy and time as independent coordinates) for all
three adiabatic invariants. First, the guiding-center equations of motion for a
relativistic particle are derived from the particle Lagrangian. Covariant
aspects of the resulting relativistic guiding-center equations of motion are
discussed and contrasted with previous works. Next, the second and third
invariants for the bounce motion and drift motion, respectively, are obtained
by successively removing the bounce phase and the drift phase from the
guiding-center Lagrangian. First-order corrections to the second and third
adiabatic invariants for a relativistic particle are derived. These results
simplify and generalize previous works to all three adiabatic motions of
relativistic magnetically-trapped particles.

Categories: gr-qc, astro-ph, hep-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: It has often been claimed that the proposed Earth artificial satellite
LARES/WEBER-SAT-whose primary goal is, in fact, the measurement of the general
relativistic Lense-Thirring effect at a some percent level-would allow to
greatly improve, among (many) other things, the present-day (10^-13) level of
accuracy in testing the equivalence principle as well. Recent claims point
towards even two orders of magnitude better, i.e. 10^-15. In this note we show
that such a goal is, in fact, unattainable by many orders of magnitude being,
instead, the achievable level of the order of 10^-9.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We study soliton pulse compression in materials with cascaded quadratic
nonlinearities, and show that the group-velocity mismatch creates two different
temporally nonlocal regimes. They correspond to what is known as the stationary
and nonstationary regimes. The theory accurately predicts the transition to the
stationary regime, where highly efficient pulse compression is possible.

Categories: physics.geo-ph
Abstract: During inter-eruption periods, magma pressurization yields subtle changes of
the elastic properties of volcanic edifices. We use the reproducibility
properties of the ambient seismic noise recorded on the Piton de la Fournaise
volcano to measure relative seismic velocity variations of less than 0.1 % with
a temporal resolution of one day. Our results show that five studied volcanic
eruptions were preceded by clearly detectable seismic velocity decreases within
the zone of magma injection. These precursors reflect the edifice dilatation
induced by magma pressurization and can be useful indicators to improve the
forecasting of volcanic eruptions.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We examine how the generation and propagation of high-order harmonics in a
partly ionized gas medium affect their strength and synchronization. The
temporal properties of the resulting attosecond pulses generated in long gas
targets can be significantly influenced by macroscopic effects, in particular
by the intensity in the medium and the degree of ionization. Under some
conditions, the use of gas targets longer than the absorption length can lead
to the generation of self-compressed attosecond pulses. We show this effect
experimentally, using long argon-filled gas cells as generating medium.

Categories: physics.space-ph, physics.ed-ph
Abstract: Integrating areas of current research into undergraduate physics labs can be
a difficult task. The location of the magnetopause is one problem that can be
examined with no prior exposure to space physics. The magnetopause location can
be viewed as a pressure balance between the dynamic pressure of the solar wind
and the magnetic pressure of the magnetosphere. In this lab sophomore and
junior students examine the magnetopause location using simulation results from
BATS-R-US global MHD code run at NASA's Community Coordinated Modeling Center.
Students also analyze data from several spacecraft to find magnetopause
crossings. The students get reasonable agreement between their results and
model predictions from this lab as well as exposure to the tools and techniques
of space physics.

Categories: physics.ed-ph, astro-ph
Abstract: This is a written version of a series of lectures aimed at undergraduate
students in astrophysics/particle theory/particle experiment. We summarize the
important progress made in recent years towards understanding high energy
astrophysical processes and we survey the state of the art regarding the
concordance model of cosmology.

Categories: astro-ph, nlin.CD, physics.flu-dyn, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We report the results of an extensive set of direct numerical simulations of
forced, incompressible, magnetohydrodynamic turbulence with a strong guide
field. The aim is to resolve the controversy regarding the power law exponent
(\alpha, say) of the field perpendicular energy spectrum E(k_\perp) \propto
k_\perp ^ {\alpha}. The two main theoretical predictions, \alpha=-3/2 and
\alpha=-5/3, have both received some support from numerical simulations carried
out by different groups. Our simulations have a resolution of 512^3 mesh
points, a strong guide field, an anisotropic simulation domain, and implement a
broad range of large-scale forcing routines, including those previously
reported in the literature. Our findings indicate that the spectrum of well
developed, strong incompressible MHD turbulence with a strong guide field is
E(k_{\perp})\propto k_{\perp}^{-3/2}.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Electric fields in a plasma that conducts a high-current pulse are measured
as a function of time and space. The experiment is performed using a coaxial
configuration, in which a current rising to 160 kA in 100 ns is conducted
through a plasma that prefills the region between two coaxial electrodes. The
electric field is determined using laser spectroscopy and line-shape analysis.
Plasma doping allows for 3D spatially resolved measurements. The measured peak
magnitude and propagation velocity of the electric field is found to match
those of the Hall electric field, inferred from the magnetic-field front
propagation measured previously.

Categories: physics.class-ph, gr-qc, hep-ph, physics.hist-ph
Abstract: We report Relativity tests based on data from two simultaneous
Michelson-Morley experiments, spanning a period of more than one year. Both
were actively rotated on turntables. One (in Berlin, Germany) uses optical
Fabry-Perot resonators made of fused silica; the other (in Perth, Australia)
uses microwave whispering-gallery sapphire resonators. Within the standard
model extension, we obtain simultaneous limits on Lorentz violation for
electrons (5 coefficients) and photons (8) at levels down to $10^{-16}$,
improved by factors between 3 and 50 compared to previous work.

Categories: q-bio.QM, cs.LG, physics.soc-ph, stat.ME, stat.ML
Abstract: Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) have become a popular tool for
computational analysis of biological data in a variety of domains. But, what
exactly are they and how do they work? How can we use PGMs to discover patterns
that are biologically relevant? And to what extent can PGMs help us formulate
new hypotheses that are testable at the bench? This note sketches out some
answers and illustrates the main ideas behind the statistical approach to
biological pattern discovery.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The thermal decomposition of n-dodecane, a component of some jet fuels, has
been studied in a jet-stirred reactor at temperatures from 793 to 1093 K, for
residence times between 1 and 5 s and at atmospheric pressure. Thermal
decomposition of hydrocarbon fuel prior the entrance in the combustion chamber
is an envisaged way to cool the wall of hypersonic vehicles. The products of
the reaction are mainly hydrogen, methane, ethane, 1,3-butadiene and 1-alkenes
from ethylene to 1-undecene. For higher temperatures and residence times
acetylene, allene, propyne, cyclopentene, 1,3-cyclopentadiene and aromatic
compounds from benzene to pyrene through naphthalene have also been observed. A
previous detailed kinetic model of the thermal decomposition of n-dodecane
generated using EXGAS software has been improved and completed by a
sub-mechanism explaining the formation and the consumption of aromatic
compounds.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Ignition delay times of cyclohexane-oxygen-argon and
cyclopentane-oxygen-argon mixtures have been measured in a shock tube, the
onset of ignition being detected by OH radical emission. Mixtures contained 0.5
or 1 % of hydrocarbon for equivalence ratios ranging from 0.5 to 2. Reflected
shock waves allowed temperatures from 1230 to 1800 K and pressures from 7.3 to
9.5 atm to be obtained. These measurements have shown that cyclopentane is much
less reactive than cyclohexane, as for a given temperature the observed
autoignition delay times were about ten times higher for the C5 compound
compared to the C6. Detailed mechanisms for the combustion of cyclohexane and
cyclopentane have been proposed to reproduce these results. The elementary
steps included in the kinetic models of the oxidation of cyclanes are close to
those proposed to describe the oxidation of acyclic alkanes and alkenes.
Consequently, it has been possible to obtain these models by using an improved
version of software EXGAS, a computer package developed to perform the
automatic generation of detailed kinetic models for the gas-phase oxidation and
combustion of linear and branched alkanes and alkenes. Nevertheless, the
modelling of the oxidation of cyclanes requires to consider new types of
generic reactions, and especially to define new correlations for the estimation
of the rate constants. Ab initio calculations have been used to better know
some of the rate constants used in the case of cyclopentane. The main reaction
pathways have been derived from flow rate and sensitivity analyses.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The composite CBS-QB3 method is widely used to obtain accurate energies of
molecules and radicals although its use in the case of singlet diradicals gives
rise to some difficulties. The problem is related to the parameterized
correction this method introduces to account for spin-contamination. We report
a new term specifically designed to describe singlet diradicals separated by at
least one CH2 unit. As a test case, we have computed the formation enthalpy of
a series of diradicals that includes hydrocarbons as well as systems involving
heteroatoms (nitrogen, oxygen). The resulting CBS-QB3 energies are very close
to experiment.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The prediction of auto-ignition delay times in HCCI engines has risen
interest on detailed chemical models. This paper described a validated kinetic
mechanism for the oxidation of a model Diesel fuel (n-decane and
&#945;-methylnaphthalene). The 3D model for the description of low and high
temperature auto-ignition in engines is presented. The behavior of the model
fuel is compared with that of n-heptane. Simulations show that the 3D model
coupled with the kinetic mechanism can reproduce experimental HCCI and Diesel
engine results and that the correct modeling of auto-ignition in the cool flame
region is essential in HCCI conditions.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: This paper presents a modeling study of the oxidation of cyclohexane from low
to intermediate temperature (650-1050 K), including the negative temperature
coefficient (NTC) zone. A detailed kinetic mechanism has been developed using
computer-aided generation. This comprehensive low-temperature mechanism
involves 513 species and 2446 reactions and includes two additions of
cyclohexyl radicals to oxygen, as well as subsequent reactions. The rate
constants of the reactions involving the formation of bicyclic species
(isomerizations, formation of cyclic ethers) have been evaluated from
literature data. This mechanism is able to satisfactorily reproduce
experimental results obtained in a rapid-compression machine for temperatures
ranging from 650 to 900 K and in a jet-stirred reactor from 750 to 1050 K.
Flow-rate analyses have been performed at low and intermediate temperatures.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In order to better understand the thermal decomposition of polycyclanes, the
pyrolysis of tricyclodecane has been studied in a jet-stirred reactor at
temperatures from 848 to 933 K, for residence times between 0.5 and 6 s and at
atmospheric pressure, in order to obtain a conversion between 0.01 and 25 %.
The main products of the reaction are hydrogen, methane, ethylene, ethane,
propene, 1,3-cyclopentadiene, cyclopentene, benzene, 1,5-hexadiene, toluene and
3-cyclopentyl-cyclopentene. A primary mechanism containing all the possible
initiation steps, including those involving diradicals, as well as propagation
reactions has been developed and allows experimental results to be
satisfactorily modeled. The main reaction pathways of consumption of
tricyclodecane and of formation of the main products have been derived from
flow rate and sensitivity analyses.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: This paper describes how automatically generated detailed kinetic mechanisms
are obtained for the oxidation of alkanes and how these models could lead to a
better understanding of autoignition and cool flame risks at elevated
conditions. Examples of prediction of the occurrence of different autoignition
phenomena, such as cool flames or two-stage ignitions are presented depending
on the condition of pressure, temperature and mixture composition. Three
compounds are treated, a light alkane, propane, and two heavier ones, n-heptane
and n-decane.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The structure of a laminar rich premixed 1,3-C4H6/CH4/O2/Ar flame have been
investigated. 1,3-Butadiene, methane, oxygen and argon mole fractions are
0.033; 0.2073; 0.3315, and 0.4280, respectively, for an equivalent ratio of
1.80. The flame has been stabilized on a burner at a pressure of 6.7 kPa (50
Torr). The concentration profiles of stable species were measured by gas
chromatography after sampling with a quartz probe. Quantified species included
carbon monoxide and dioxide, methane, oxygen, hydrogen, ethane, ethylene,
acetylene, propyne, allene, propene, cyclopropane, 1,3-butadiene, butenes,
1-butyne, vinylacetylene, diacetylene, C5 compounds, benzene, and toluene. The
temperature was measured thanks to a thermocouple in PtRh (6%)-PtRh (30%)
settled inside the enclosure and ranged from 900 K close to the burner up to
2100 K.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, q-bio.GN
Abstract: RNA polymerase (RNAP) is an enzyme that synthesizes a messenger RNA (mRNA)
strand which is complementary to a single-stranded DNA template. From the
perspective of physicists, an RNAP is a molecular motor that utilizes chemical
energy input to move along the track formed by a ssDNA. In some circumstances,
which are described in this paper, a large number of RNAPs move simultaneously
along the same track. We refer to such collective movements of the RNAPs as
RNAP traffic because of the similarities between the collective dynamics of the
RNAPs on ssDNA track and that of vehicles in highway traffic. In this paper we
develop a theoretical model for RNAP traffic by incorporating the steric
interactions between RNAPs as well as the mechano-chemical cycle of individual
RNAPs during the elongation of the mRNA. By a combination of analytical and
numerical techniques, we calculate the rates of mRNA synthesis and the average
density profile of the RNAPs on the ssDNA track. We also suggest novel
experiments for testing our theoretical predictions.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A two-dimensional Minkowski spacetime diagram is neatly represented on a
Euclidean ordinary plane. However the Euclidean lengths of the lines on the
diagram do not correspond to the true values of physical quantities in
spacetime, except for those referring to the stationary reference frame. In
order to extend its abilities to other inertial reference frames, we derive a
factor which, multiplied by the magnitude of the actually displayed values (on
the diagram), leads to the corresponding true measured values by any other
inertial observers. Doing so, the student can infer from the Euclidean diagram
plot the expressions that account for Lorentz length contraction, time dilation
and also Lorentz Transformations just by using regular trigonometry.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Multifractal analysis and extensive statistical tests are performed upon
intraday minutely data within individual trading days for four stock market
indexes (including HSI, SZSC, S&P500, and NASDAQ) to check whether the indexes
(instead of the returns) possess multifractality. We find that the mass
exponent $\tau(q)$ is linear and the singularity $\alpha(q)$ is close to 1 for
all trading days and all indexes. Furthermore, we find strong evidence showing
that the scaling behaviors of the original data sets cannot be distinguished
from those of the shuffled time series. Hence, the so-called multifractality in
the intraday stock market indexes is merely an illusion.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We perform a detailed analysis of high-order harmonic generation in diatomic
molecules within the strong-field approximation, with emphasis on
quantum-interference effects. Specifically, we investigate how the different
types of electron orbits, involving one or two centers, affect the interference
patterns in the spectra. We also briefly address the influence of the choice of
gauge, and of the initial and final electronic bound states on such patterns.
For the length-gauge SFA and undressed bound states, there exist additional
terms, which can be interpreted as potential energy shifts. If, on the one
hand, such shifts alter the potential barriers through which the electron
initially tunnels, and may lead to a questionable physical interpretation of
the features encountered, on the other hand they seem to be necessary in order
to reproduce the overall maxima and minima in the spectra. Indeed, for dressed
electronic bound states in the length gauge, or undressed bound states in the
velocity gauge, for which such shifts are absent, there is a breakdown of the
interference patterns. In order to avoid such a problem, we provide an
alternative pathway for the electron to reach the continuum, by means of an
additional attosecond-pulse train. A comparison of the purely monochromatic
case with the situation for which the attosecond pulses are present suggests
that the patterns are due to the interference between the electron orbits which
finish at different centers, regardless of whether one or two centers are
involved.

Categories: physics.ed-ph
Abstract: Physics faculty consider the photoelectric effect important, but many
erroneously believe it is easy for students to understand. We have developed
curriculum on this topic including an interactive computer simulation,
interactive lectures with peer instruction, and conceptual and mathematical
homework problems. Our curriculum addresses established student difficulties
and is designed to achieve two learning goals, for students to be able to (1)
correctly predict the results of photoelectric effect experiments, and (2)
describe how these results lead to the photon model of light. We designed two
exam questions to test these learning goals. Our instruction leads to better
student mastery of the first goal than either traditional instruction or
previous reformed instruction, with approximately 85% of students correctly
predicting the results of changes to the experimental conditions. On the
question designed to test the second goal, most students are able to correctly
state both the observations made in the photoelectric effect experiment and the
inferences that can be made from these observations, but are less successful in
drawing a clear logical connection between the observations and inferences.
This is likely a symptom of a more general lack of the reasoning skills to
logically draw inferences from observations.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph
Abstract: The formation of macroscopic reconnected magnetic structures (islands) have
been observed in advanced experiments on weakly collisional, well confined
plasmas while established theories of the drift-tearing modes, which depend
strongly on the electron temperature gradient and can describe the formation of
these structures, had predicted practically inaccessible excitation thresholds
for them in these regimes. The relevant theoretical dilemma is resolved as
mesoscopic modes that depend critically on the ratio of the transverse (to the
magnetic field) to the longitudinal thermal
conductivity${D^e_{\perp}/D^e_{\|}$, can produce large scale magnetic
reconnection. These modes are envisioned to emerge from a background, which can
be coherent, of collisionless microscopic reconnecting modes driven by the
electron temperature gradient, that create a sequence of adjacent strings of
magnetic islands and increase considerably the ratio ${D^e_{\perp}/D^e_{\|}$
over its classical value. The mesoscopic reconnecting mode is treated by a
singular perturbation analysis involving three asymptotic regions and the small
parameters ${(D^e_{\perp}/D^e_{\|})}^{1/4}$ and ${\epsilon}^{1/4}_{*}$, where
${\epsilon}_{*} {\equiv}D_m/D_A$, $D_m$ is the magnetic diffusion coefficient,
$D_A\sim\texttt{v}^{2}_{A}r_{Te}/(D_Bk_{\perp})$,
$r_{Te}\equiv(-d\texttt{ln}T_e/dr)^{-1}$, $k_{\perp}$ is the transverse mode
number, $\texttt{v}^{2}_{A}=B^{2}/(4\pi{nm}_{i})}$ and $D_B=cT_e/(eB)$.

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: There are two main methods of nulcear fusion: inertial confinement fusion
(ICF) and magnetic confinement fusion (MCF). Existing thermonuclear reactors
are very complex, expensive, large, and heavy. They cannot achieve the Lawson
creterion.
  The author offers an innovation. ICF has on the inside surface of the
shell-shaped combustion chamber a covering of small Prism Reflectors (PR) and
plasma reflector. These prism reflectors have a noteworthy advantage, in
comparison with conventional mirror and especially with conventional shell:
they multi-reflect the heat and laser radiation exactly back into collision
with the fuel target capsule (pellet). The plasma reflector reflects the
Bremsstrahlung radiation.
  The offered innovation decreases radiation losses, creates significant
radiation pressure and increases the reaction time. The Lawson criterion
increases by hundreds of times. The size, cost, and weight of a typical
installation will decrease by tens of times.
  The author is researching the efficiency of these innovations. Keywords:
Thermonuclear reactor, Multi-reflex AB-thermonuclear reactor, aerospace
thermonuclear engine.
  This work is presented as paper AIAA-2006-7225 to Space-2006 Conference,
19-21 September, 2006, San Jose, CA, USA.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: To investigate the formation mechanism of energy spectra of internal waves in
the oceans, direct numerical simulations are performed. The simulations are
based on the reduced dynamical equations of rotating stratified turbulence. In
the reduced dynamical equations only wave modes are retained, and vortices and
horizontally uniform vertical shears are excluded. Despite the simplifications,
our simulations reproduce some key features of oceanic internal-wave spectra:
accumulation of energy at near-inertial waves and realistic frequency and
horizontal wavenumber dependencies. Furthermore, we provide evidence that
formation of the energy spectra in the inertial subrange is dominated by
scale-separated interactions with the near-inertial waves. These findings
support oceanographers' intuition that spectral energy density of internal
waves is the result of predominantly wave-wave interactions.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The effects of chaotic advection and diffusion on fast chemical reactions in
two-dimensional fluid flows are investigated using experimentally measured
stretching fields and fluorescent monitoring of the local concentration. Flow
symmetry, Reynolds number, and mean path length affect the spatial distribution
and time dependence of the reaction product. A single parameter \lambda*N,
where \lambda is the mean Lyapunov exponent and N is the number of mixing
cycles, can be used to predict the time-dependent total product for flows
having different dynamical features.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Detecting community structure in real-world networks is a challenging
problem. Recently, it has been shown that the resolution of methods based on
optimizing a modularity measure or a corresponding energy is limited;
communities with sizes below some threshold remain unresolved. One possibility
to go around this problem is to vary the threshold by using a tuning parameter,
and investigate the community structure at variable resolutions. Here, we
analyze the resolution limit and multiresolution behavior for two different
methods: a q-state Potts method proposed by Reichard and Bornholdt, and a
recent multiresolution method by Arenas, Fernandez, and Gomez. These methods
are studied analytically, and applied to three test networks using simulated
annealing.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: In this article, localized linear defect modes due to bandgap guidance in
two-dimensional photonic lattices with localized or non-localized defects are
investigated theoretically. First, when the defect is localized and weak,
eigenvalues of defect modes bifurcated from edges of Bloch bands are derived
analytically. It is shown that in an attractive (repulsive) defect, defect
modes bifurcate out from Bloch-band edges with normal (anomalous) diffraction
coefficients. Furthermore, distances between defect-mode eigenvalues and
Bloch-band edges are exponentially small functions of the defect strength,
which is very different from the one-dimensional case where such distances are
quadratically small with the defect strength. It is also found that some
defect-mode branches bifurcate not from Bloch-band edges, but from quasi-edge
points within Bloch bands, which is very unusual. Second, when the defect is
localized but strong, defect modes are determined numerically. It is shown that
both the repulsive and attractive defects can support various types of defect
modes such as fundamental, dipole, quadrupole, and vortex modes. These modes
reside in various bandgaps of the photonic lattice. As the defect strength
increases, defect modes move from lower bandgaps to higher ones when the defect
is repulsive, but remain within each bandgap when the defect is attractive,
similar to the one-dimensional case. The same phenomena are observed when the
defect is held fixed while the applied dc field (which controls the lattice
potential) increases. Lastly, if the defect is non-localized (i.e. it persists
at large distances in the lattice), it is shown that defect modes can be
embedded inside the continuous spectrum, and they can bifurcate out from edges
of the continuous spectrum algebraically rather than exponentially.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Preferential attachment is a popular generative mechanism to explain the
widespread observation of power law distributed networks. We introduce an
alternative explanation for the phenomenon by allowing the link growth rates to
vary across the nodes according to a randomized Poisson process. The
distribution of rates, which reproduces the degree distribution of a
preferential attachment process (Yule process) is derived analytically. We
demonstrate with use of simulations that the degree distribution and growth
rates in single time intervals are similar for the random process and the
preferential attachment process. Structural differences are analyzed by
examining the joint degree distribution and network coreness.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: We present and investigate different external cavity diode laser (ECDL)
configurations for the manipulation of neutrals atoms, wavelength-stabilized by
a narrow-band high transmission interference filter. A novel diode laser,
providing high output power of more than 1 W, with a linewidth of less than 200
kHz, based on a self-seeded tapered amplifier chip has been developed.
Additionally, we compare the optical and spectral properties of two laser
systems based on common laser diodes, differing in their coating, as well as
one, based on a distributed-feedback (DFB) diode. The linear cavity setup in
all these systems combines a robust and compact design with a high wavelength
tunability and an improved stability of the optical feedback compared to diode
laser setups using diffraction gratings for wavelength discrimination.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Waveguides composed of electromagnetically-coupled optical microcavities
(coupled resonator optical waveguides or CROWs) can be used for light guiding,
slowing and storage. In this paper, we present a two-dimensional analysis of
finite-size straight and curved CROW sections based on a rigorous Muller
boundary integral equations method. We study mechanisms of the coupling of
whispering gallery (WG) modes and guiding light around bends in CROWs composed
of both identical and size-mismatched microdisk resonators. Our accurate
analysis reveals differences in WG modes coupling in the vicinity of bends in
CROWs composed of optically-large and wavelength-scale microcavities. We
propose and discuss possible ways to design low-loss CROW bends and to reduce
bend losses. These include selecting specific bend angles depending on the
azimuthal order of the WG mode and tuning the radius of the microdisk
positioned at the CROW bend.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: In this article we derive longitudinal impedance and wake function for an
undulator setup with arbitrary undulator parameter, taking into account a
finite transverse size of the electron bunch. Earlier studies considered a line
density-distribution of electrons instead. We focus our attention on the
long-wavelength asymptote (compared with resonance wavelength), at large
distance of the electron bunch from the undulator entrance compared to the
overtaking length, and for large vacuum-chamber size compared to the typical
transverse size of the field. These restrictions define a parameter region of
interest for practical applications. We calculate a closed expression for
impedance and wake function that may be evaluated numerically in the most
general case. Such expression allows us to derive an analytical solution for a
Gaussian transverse and longitudinal bunch shape. Finally, we study the
feasibility of current-enhanced SASE schemes (ESASE) recently proposed for
LCLS, that fall well-within our approximations. Numerical estimations presented
in this paper indicate that impedance-induced energy spread is sufficient to
seriously degrade the FEL performance. Our conclusion is in contrast with
results in literature, where wake calculations for the LCLS case are given in
free-space, as if the presence of the undulator were negligible.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The Dupree-Weinstock renormalization is used to prove that a reactive closure
exists for drift wave turbulence in magnetized plasmas. The result is used to
explain recent results in gyrokinetic simulations and is also related to the
Mattor-Parker closure. The level of closure is found in terms of applied
external sources.

Categories: q-bio.GN, cond-mat.other, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.QM
Abstract: We study the length distribution of a particular class of DNA sequences known
as 5'UTR exons. These exons belong to the messanger RNA of protein coding
genes, but they are not coding (they are located upstream of the coding portion
of the mRNA) and are thus less constrained from an evolutionary point of view.
We show that both in mouse and in human these exons show a very clean power law
decay in their length distribution and suggest a simple evolutionary model
which may explain this finding. We conjecture that this power law behaviour
could indeed be a general feature of higher eukaryotes.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The semiclassical theory of laser cooling is applied for the analysis of
cooling of unbound atoms with the values of the ground and exited state angular
moments 1/2 in a one-dimensional nondissipative optical lattice. We show that
in the low-saturation limit with respect to the pumping field a qualitative
interpretation of the cooling mechanisms can be made by the consideration of
effective two-level system of the ground-state sublevels. It is clarified that
in the limit of weak Raman transitions the cooling mechanism is similar to the
Doppler mechanism, which is known in the theory of two-level atom. In the limit
of strong Raman transitions the cooling mechanism is similar to the known
Sisyphus mechanism. In the slow atom approximation the analytical expressions
for the coefficients of friction, spontaneous and induced diffusion are given,
and the kinetic temperature is estimated.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, nucl-ex
Abstract: We report the first observations of beam losses due to bound-free pair
production at the interaction point of a heavy-ion collider. This process is
expected to be a major luminosity limit for the Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
when it operates with 208Pb82+ ions because the localized energy deposition by
the lost ions may quench superconducting magnet coils. Measurements were
performed at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) during operation with
100 GeV/nucleon 63Cu29+ ions. At RHIC, the rate, energy and magnetic field are
low enough so that magnet quenching is not an issue. The hadronic showers
produced when the single-electron ions struck the RHIC beampipe were observed
using an array of photodiodes. The measurement confirms the order of magnitude
of the theoretical cross section previously calculated by others.

Categories: nlin.CD, physics.ao-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Aerosols under chaotic advection often approach a strange attractor. They
move chaotically on this fractal set but, in the presence of gravity, they have
a net vertical motion downwards. In practical situations, observational data
may be available only at a given level, for example at the ground level. We
uncover two fractal signatures of chaotic advection of aerosols under the
action of gravity. Each one enables the computation of the fractal dimension
$D_{0}$ of the strange attractor governing the advection dynamics from data
obtained solely at a given level. We illustrate our theoretical findings with a
numerical experiment and discuss their possible relevance to meteorology.

Categories: hep-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: In their textbook, Suzuki and Varga [Y. Suzuki and K. Varga, {\em Stochastic
Variational Approach to Quantum-Mechanical Few-Body Problems} (Springer,
Berlin, 1998)] present the stochastic variational method in a very exhaustive
way. In this framework, the so-called correlated gaussian bases are often
employed. General formulae for the matrix elements of various operators can be
found in the textbook. However the Fourier transform of correlated gaussians
and their application to the management of a relativistic kinetic energy
operator are missing and cannot be found in the literature. In this paper we
present these interesting formulae. We give also a derivation for new
formulations concerning central potentials; the corresponding formulae are more
efficient numerically than those presented in the textbook.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: This is the first in a series of articles in which we study the rotating
Morse potential model for diatomic molecules in the tridiagonal J-matrix
representation. Here, we compute the bound states energy spectrum by
diagonalizing the finite dimensional Hamiltonian matrix of H2, LiH, HCl and CO
molecules for arbitrary angular momentum. The calculation was performed using
the J-matrix basis that supports a tridiagonal matrix representation for the
reference Hamiltonian. Our results for these diatomic molecules have been
compared with available numerical data satisfactorily. The proposed method is
handy, very efficient, and it enhances accuracy by combining analytic power
with a convergent and stable numerical technique.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The authors study the ultrafast switching-on and -off of planar GaAs/AlAs
microcavities. Up to 0.8% refractive index changes are achieved by optically
exciting free carriers at 1720 nm and a pulse energy of 1.8 micro Joules. The
cavity resonance is dynamically tracked by measuring reflectivity versus time
delay with tunable laser pulses, and is found to shift by as much as 3.3
linewidths within a few picoseconds. The switching-off occurs with a decay time
of around 50 ps. The authors derive the dynamic behavior of the carrier density
and of the complex refractive index. They propose that the inferred 10 GHz
switching rate may be tenfold improved by optimized sample growth.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: Unexpected spectral features are observed in the two photon spectrum of the
pure water in the forward direction when an 80 femtosecond laser pulse is
focused at 10^10Wcm-2 or less. Such intensity is much lower than the breakdown
or stimulated threshold of the liquid water. The two broad features are about
2700cm-1 and 5000cm-1 red shifted from the hyper-Rayleigh wavelength,
respectively, and they are quadratic with the laser intensity. They do not
match the known Raman or hyper-Raman frequencies of water, and they are both
centered at a narrow angle in the forward direction. Several other liquids also
exhibited similar but molecular specific spectral features.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The Maxwell equations with accounting for tensors properties of time have
been considered. The effects that follow from such consideration are described.
These are the appearance of vacuum polarization, anisotropy of electromagnetic
wave velocity in vacuum, anisotropy of the vacuum dielectric permittivity,
rotation of light polarization plane, as well as the existence of longitudinal
components of electromagnetic wave and the rotational (non-potential) component
of electric field caused by electric charges.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We investigate the dynamic evolution of the radiation forces produced by the
pulsed Gaussian beams acting on a Rayleigh dielectric sphere. We derive the
analytical expressions for the scattering force and all components of the
ponderomotive force induced by the pulsed Gaussian beams. Our analysis shows
that the radiation force, for both the transverse and longitudinal components,
can be greatly enhanced as the pulse duration decreases. It is further found
that for the pulse with long pulse duration, it can be used for the stable
trapping and manipulating the particle, while for the pulse with short pulse
duration it may be used for guiding and moving the small dielectric particle.
Finally we discuss the stability conditions of the effective manipulating the
particle by the pulsed beam.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: In this paper, we present a new model, hollow Gaussian-Schell model beams
(HGSMBs), to describe the practical dark hollow beams. An analytical
propagation formula for HGSMBs passing through a paraxial first-order optical
system is derived based on the theory of coherence. Based on the derived
formula, an application example showing the influence of spatial coherence on
the propagation of beams is illustrated. It is found that the beam propagating
properties of HGSMBs will be greatly affected by their spatial coherence. Our
model provides a very convenient way for analyzing the propagation properties
of partially coherent dark hollow beams.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The technique of applying form-invariant, spatial coordinate transformations
of Maxwell's equations can facilitate the design of structures with unique
electromagnetic or optical functionality. Here, we illustrate the
transformation-optical approach in the designs of a square electromagnetic
cloak and an omni-directional electromagnetic field concentrator. The
transformation equations are described and the functionality of the devices is
numerically confirmed by two-dimensional finite element simulations. The two
devices presented demonstrate that the transformation optic approach leads to
the specification of complex, anisotropic and inhomogeneous materials with well
directed and distinct electromagnetic behavior.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We report model calculations on DNA single strands which describe the
equilibrium dynamics and kinetics of hairpin formation and melting. Modeling is
at the level of single bases. Strand rigidity is described in terms of simple
polymer models; alternative calculations performed using the freely rotating
chain and the discrete Kratky-Porod models are reported. Stem formation is
modeled according to the Peyrard-Bishop-Dauxois Hamiltonian. The kinetics of
opening and closing is described in terms of a diffusion-controlled motion in
an effective free energy landscape. Melting profiles, dependence of melting
temperature on loop length, and kinetic time scales are in semiquantitative
agreement with experimental data obtained from fluorescent DNA beacons forming
poly(T) loops. Variation in strand rigidity is not sufficient to account for
the large activation enthalpy of closing and the strong loop length dependence
observed in hairpins forming poly(A) loops. Implications for modeling single
strands of DNA or RNA are discussed.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We have studied the acoustooptic (AO) diffraction in Sn2P2S6 crystals and
found that they manifest high values of AO figure of merit. The above crystals
may therefore be used as highly efficient materials in different AO
applications.

Categories: physics.ins-det, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Diamonds offer radiation hard sensors, which can be used directly in primary
beams. Here we report on the use of a polycrystalline CVD diamond strip sensor
as beam monitor of heavy ion beams with up to 2.10^9 lead ions per bunch. The
strips allow for a determination of the transverse beam profile to a fraction
of the pitch of the strips, while the timing information yields the
longitudinal bunch length with a resolution of the order of a few mm.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, math-ph, math.MP, nlin.CD, physics.data-an
Abstract: Information functionals allow to quantify the degree of randomness of a given
probability distribution, either absolutely (through min/max entropy
principles) or relative to a prescribed reference one. Our primary aim is to
analyze the "minimum information" assumption, which is a classic concept (R.
Balian, 1968) in the random matrix theory. We put special emphasis on generic
level (eigenvalue) spacing distributions and the degree of their randomness, or
alternatively - information/organization deficit.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This contribution analyses the classical laws of motion by means of an
approach relating time and entropy. We argue that adopting the notion of change
of states as opposed to the usual derivation of Newton's laws in terms of
fields a broader picture is obtained, suggesting that diverse branches of
physics- classical, quantum, relativistic and statistical mechanics - turn out
to be related by a common foundation.

Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.mes-hall, cond-mat.other, physics.optics
Abstract: We consider semiclassical higher-order wave packet solutions of the
Schrodinger equation with phase vortices. The vortex line is aligned with the
propagation direction, and the wave packet carries a well-defined orbital
angular momentum (OAM) $\hbar l$ ($l$ is the vortex strength) along its main
linear momentum. The probability current coils around momentum in such OAM
states of electrons. In an electric field, these states evolve like massless
particles with spin $l$. The magnetic-monopole Berry curvature appears in
momentum space, which results in a spin-orbit-type interaction and a
Berry/Magnus transverse force acting on the wave packet. This brings about the
OAM Hall effect. In a magnetic field, there is a Zeeman interaction, which, can
lead to more complicated dynamics.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Inequality of forward and reversed processes in quantum physics means an
existence of a memory of quantum system about the initial state. Importance of
its experimental study for correct interpretation of quantum mechanics and
understanding of a physical base of a consciousness is discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The relationship between the length gauge (LG) and the velocity gauge (VG)
exact forms of the photoionization probability amplitude is considered. Our
motivation for this paper comes from applications of the Keldysh-Faisal-Reiss
(KFR) theory, which describes atoms (or ions) in a strong laser field (in the
nonrelativistic approach, in the dipole approximation). On the faith of a
certain widely-accepted assumption, we present a simple proof that the
well-known LG form of the exact photoionization (or photodetachment)
probability amplitude is indeed the gauge-invariant result. In contrast, to
obtain the VG form of this probability amplitude, one has to either (i) neglect
the well-known Goeppert-Mayer exponential factor (which assures gauge
invariance) during all the time evolution of the ionized electron or (ii) put
some conditions on the vector potential of the laser field.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.med-ph
Abstract: It has been shown that conformational modifications of Hb induced by ethanol
consumption can be visualized in optical spectra studying oxygenation kinetics
of hemoglobin or mixing hemoglobin with Cibacron blue dye. Better dye affinity
of blood proteins extracted from alcoholised rats with respect to those from
non-alcoholised ones confirms that ethanol and its metabolites induce
structural pathologies in blood protein molecules. The detected changes for the
case of the posterity of intoxicated animals may be explained as a
post-translation modification, as well as a disturbance of the structure and
function of tissue cellular gene mechanism for the blood creation. It is
established that alcohol intake during first four months leads to the decrease
of fractional weight of oxyhemoglobin and to the increase of methemoglobin
amount in blood. Further alcohol consumption is accompanied by recovering of
the normal level of hemoglobin derivatives in blood. Normalization of the
fractional weight of hemoglobin derivatives in blood after durable (longer than
5-6 months) ethanol intoxication is most probably due to the activation of the
enzyme (acetaldehyde dehydrogenase) system, lowering the level of acetaldehydes
in blood.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: In this study, the one-center expansion formulas in terms of complete
orthonormal sets of -exponential type orbitals (-ETOs,) are established for the
Slater type orbitals (STOs) and Coulomb-Yukawa like correlated interaction
potentials (CIPs) of integer and noninteger indices. These relations are used
in obtaining the unsymmetrical and symmetrical one-range addition theorems for
STOs and Coulomb-Yukawa like CIPs. The final results are especially useful in
the calculations of multicenter multielectron integrals of STOs and CIPs
occurring when Hartree-Fock-Roothaan (HFR) and explicitly correlated method are
employed.

Categories: physics.ins-det, nucl-ex
Abstract: We present results on the performance of the first prototype of the CASTOR
quartz-tungsten sampling calorimeter, to be installed in the very forward
region of the CMS experiment at the LHC. This study includes GEANT Monte Carlo
simulations of the Cherenkov light transmission efficiency of different types
of air-core light guides, as well as analysis of the calorimeter linearity and
resolution as a function of energy and impact-point, obtained with 20-200 GeV
electron beams from CERN/SPS tests in 2003. Several configurations of the
calorimeter have been tested and compared, including different combinations of
(i) structures for the active material of the calorimeter (quartz plates and
fibres), (ii) various light-guide reflecting materials (glass and foil
reflectors) and (iii) photodetector devices (photomultipliers and avalanche
photodiodes).

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The Schelling model of 1971 is a complicated version of a square-lattice
Ising model at zero temperature, to explain urban segregation, based on the
neighbour preferences of the residents, without external reasons. Various
versions between Ising and Schelling models give about the same results.
Inhomogeneous "temperatures" T do not change the results much, while a feedback
between segregation and T leads to a self-organisation of an average T.

Categories: physics.pop-ph, physics.hist-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: The interpretation of an experimental realization of Wheeler's delayed-choice
gedanken experiment is discussed and called into question.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: It is shown that, in the model of a flat 3D space, the time (i.e., the Hubble
or the gravitation constant) plays a role of a spatial property. Gravitation
field of spherical central mass does not lead to a lowering of symmetry of the
space and appearance of anisotropy. In particular, the relations that describe
the changes in the refractive indices of the space treated as an optical medium
near the massive spherical body under the influence of its gravitation field
have been derived.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In the previous report, we have demonstrated cascade branching channels of
the multipolar E3 transition of rhodium Mossbauer gamma via the time- and
energy-resolved spectroscopy. Moreover, superradiance in the Borrmann channel
from inverted nuclei gives gamma entanglement. In this letter, we report
further four observations of superradiance and its associated gamma
entanglement at the liquid-nitrogen temperature, i.e. (i) speed-up decay, (ii)
immediate recovery of the speed-up decay after quenching, (iii) simultaneous
suppression of gamma and K lines, and (iv) enhanced multiple ionizations.
Anisotropic superradiant channels open by quenching and recover back
immediately after quenching. Enhanced K satellites and K hypersatellites
induced by cooling are attributed to the inelastic scattering of more than
three entangled gammas.

Categories: quant-ph, gr-qc, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report experimental observations of the long-lived rhodium Mossbauer
emissions by the time- and energy-resolved spectroscopy. The extraordinary
observations manifest the open-up of photonic band gap in analogy to the
superconducting gap of remarkable symmetry breakings at transition point. These
observations are of potential importance for detecting gravitational waves and
development of the two-photon gamma laser. Firstly, phase transitions shown by
spectral evolution of characteristic emissions reveal the different aggregate
exciton orderings at room temperature. Six different phases are identified by
spectra profiles emitted from the color centers. Secondly, the cascade
branching of the multipolar nuclear transition is discovered being the
spontaneous cascade down-conversion to generate entangled gammas. The
macroscopic angular distribution of entangled gammas from the polycrystalline
sample manifests a global photon-nucleus-photon bound state across the grain
boundaries. Thirdly, the gamma-energy distributions depending on exciton phases
reveal the photonic band gap typically on the order of several hundred eV.

Categories: physics.ins-det, nucl-ex
Abstract: We present results of the performance of the second prototype of the CASTOR
quartz-tungsten sampling calorimeter, to be installed in the very forward
region of the CMS experiment at the LHC. The energy linearity and resolution,
as well as the spatial resolution of the prototype to electromagnetic and
hadronic showers are studied with E=20-200 GeV electrons, E=20-350 GeV pions,
and E=50,150 GeV muons from beam tests carried out at CERN/SPS in 2004. The
responses of the calorimeter using two different types of photodetectors
(avalanche photodiodes APDs, and photomultiplier tubes PMTs) are compared.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: One of the main concerns in the design of low emittance linear accelerators
(linacs) is the preservation of beam emittance. Here we discuss one possible
source of emittance dilution, the coupler kick, due to transverse
electromagnetic fields in the accelerating cavities of the linac caused by the
power coupler geometry. In addition to emittance growth, the coupler kick also
produces orbit distortions. It is common wisdom that emittance growth from
coupler kicks can be strongly reduced by using two couplers per cavity mounted
opposite each other or by having the couplers of successive cavities
alternation from above to below the beam pipe so as to cancel each individual
kick. We therefore analyze consequences of alternate coupler placements.
  We show here that for sufficiently large Q values, alternating the coupler
location from before to after the cavity leads to a cancellation of the orbit
distortion but not of the emittance growth, whereas alternating the coupler
location from before and above to behind and below the cavity cancels the
emittance growth but not the orbit distortion. These compensations hold even
when each cavity is individually detuned, e.g. by microphonics. Another
effective method for reducing coupler kicks that is studied is the optimization
of the phase of the coupler kick. This technique is independent of the coupler
geometry but relies on operating on crest. A final technique studied is
symmetrization of the cavity geometry in the coupler region with the addition
of a stub opposite the coupler, which reduces the amplitude of the off axis
fields and is thus effective for off crest acceleration as well.
  We show applications of these techniques to the energy recovery linac (ERL)
planned at Cornell University.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: A simple model is applied to study a high temperature rather dense plasma
ball. It is assumed that the ions and delocalized electrons are distributed
uniformly throughout the ball, and extra/missing charge is found in a thin
layer on the surface of a ball. It is shown in the framework of this model that
regarded plasma ball can be relatively stable as a metastable state.
Calculations show that electrostatic forces, repulsive forces between the ions,
and atmospheric pressure can provide stability of a plasma ball. Presented
model could be useful to understand the nature of a ball lightning.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: Three-body recombination, an important collisional process in plasmas,
increases dramatically at low electron temperatures, with an accepted scaling
of T_e^-9/2. We measure three-body recombination in an ultracold neutral xenon
plasma by detecting recombination-created Rydberg atoms using a
microwave-ionization technique. With the accepted theory (expected to be
applicable for weakly-coupled plasmas) and our measured rates we extract the
plasma temperatures, which are in reasonable agreement with previous
measurements early in the plasma lifetime. The resulting electron temperatures
indicate that the plasma continues to cool to temperatures below 1 K.

Categories: physics.optics, astro-ph, physics.ins-det
Abstract: Using an l = 1 blazed fork-hologram at the focal plane of the Asiago 122 cm
telescope, we obtained optical vortices from the stellar system Rasalgethi
(alpha Herculis) and from the single star Arcturus (alpha Bootis). We have
analyzed the structure of the optical vortices obtained from non-monochromatic
starlight under very poor seeing conditions using a fast CCD camera to obtain
speckle patterns and carry out the lucky imaging technique, alternative to
adaptive optics. With the insertion of a red filter and of a Lyot stop we
performed l = 1 optical vortex coronography the double star HD74010. The
results are in agreement with theory and numerical simulations. Our results
open the way to applications of optical vortices to ground based astronomical
observations, in particular for coronagraphy with l > 1 masks. No intrinsic
orbital angular momentum was detected in the starlight.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, hep-ph, hep-th
Abstract: This is the first of two lectures on a new powerful technique employed by
Brown, Preston, and Singleton (BPS) to calculate transport quantities in a
plasma. This exposition will be self-contained and intended for those who are
not specialists in quantum field theory, where the technique of dimensional
continuation exploited by BPS first arose. The method is highlighted by the
interesting analogy between the Coulomb logarithm of Lyman Spitzer on the one
hand, and the Lamb shift as calculated by Hans Bethe on the other. BPS employed
the method in a novel way that provides the leading and subleading behavior for
processes with competing disparate length or energy scales. They calculated the
temperature equilibration rate to leading and next-to-leading order in the
plasma number density for any two species in a plasma that are in thermal
equilibrium with themselves, but not necessarily with each other. A special
case of this calculation is the electron-ion temperature equilibration rate. It
should be emphasized that the BPS result is not a model, but rather it is an
exact calculation of the leading terms in a well-defined perturbation theory.
This exact result differs from approximations and models given in the
literature.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The long-range quadrupole-quadrupole ($\sim R^{-5}$) and leading dispersion
($\sim R^{-6}$) interactions between all pairs of excited Hg($6s6p$) $^3P_0$,
$^3P_1$, $^3P_2$, and $^1P_1$ atoms are determined. The quadrupole moments are
calculated using the {\it ab initio} relativistic configuration-interaction
method coupled with many-body perturbation theory. The van der Waals
coefficients are approximated using previously calculated static
polarizabilities and expressions for the dispersion energy that are validated
with similar systems. The long-range interactions are critical for associative
ionization in thermal and cold collisions, and are found to be quite different
for different pairs of interacting states. Based on this knowledge and the
short-range parts of previously calculated potential curves, improved estimates
of the chemi-ionization cross sections are obtained.

Categories: physics.ed-ph
Abstract: In teaching the physical sciences, a significant challenge lies in the
student's tendency to consider the scientific world and the "real" world as
separate. For example, Newton's 1st Law of Motion states that an object in
motion remains in motion in a straight line unless acted on by an external
force. However, our experience tells us that most objects keep moving only as
long as someone or something pushes on them. One key to understanding physics
is the ability to abstract the "law" from a reality which also includes
friction and other effects. In this article we describe a college course for
non-science majors, The Physics of Dance. The central theme of this course is
the personalization of the physics of motion by making each student the object.
With this approach we give students not only scientific tools to measure and
understand but personal involvement to experience forces and motion. This
combination provides a bridge that connects the science to reality.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A two-parameter neutrino mass formula is described, giving a moderately
hierarchical spectrum m_1 < m_2 < m_3 consistent with the experimental
estimates of Delta m^2_{21} and Delta m^2_{32}. The formula follows from a
three-parameter empirical neutrino mass formula through imposing a parameter
constraint and leads to a very simple neutrino mass sum rule m_3 = 18 m_2 - 48
m_1. Some alternative parameter constraints, used tentatively to eliminate one
of three parameters, are compared.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: When a solid plate is withdrawn from a liquid bath, a receding contact line
is formed where solid, liquid, and gas meet. Above a critical speed $U_{cr}$, a
stationary contact line can no longer exist and the solid will eventually be
covered completely by a liquid film. Here we show that the bifurcation diagram
of this coating transition changes qualitatively, from discontinuous to
continuous, when decreasing the inclination angle of the plate. We show that
this effect is governed by the presence of capillary waves, illustrating that
the large scale flow strongly effects the maximum speed of dewetting.

Categories: physics.med-ph, q-bio.NC
Abstract: The purpose of the present experiment was to investigate whether the sensory
weighting of a plantar pressure-based, tongue-placed tactile biofeedback for
controlling posture could be subject to inter-individual variability. To
achieve this goal, 60 young healthy adults were asked to stand as immobile as
possible with their eyes closed in two conditions of No-biofeedback and
Biofeedback. Centre of foot pressure (CoP) displacements were recorded using a
force platform. Overall, results showed reduced CoP displacements in the
Biofeedback relative to the No-biofeedback condition, evidencing the ability of
the central nervous system to efficiently integrate an artificial
plantar-based, tongue-placed tactile biofeedback for controlling posture during
quiet standing. Results further showed a significant positive correlation
between the CoP displacements measured in the No-biofeedback condition and the
decrease in the CoP displacements induced by the use of the biofeedback. In
other words, the degree of postural stabilization appeared to depend on each
subject's balance control capabilities, the biofeedback yielding a greater
stabilizing effect in subjects exhibiting the largest CoP displacements when
standing in the No-biofeedback condition. On the whole, by evidencing a
significant inter-individual variability in sensory weighting of an additional
tactile information related to foot sole pressure distribution for controlling
posture, the present findings underscore the need and the necessity to address
the issue of inter-individual variability in the field of neuroscience.

Categories: astro-ph, gr-qc, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Pairs potential-density in terms of elementary functions that represents flat
rings structures are presented. We study structures representing one or several
concentric flat rings. Also disks surrounded by concentric flat rings are
exhibited. The stability of concentrically circular orbits of particles moving
on a flat ring structure is analyzed for radial perturbations.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: A comprehensive study of the electronic states at the 4s+5s asymptote in KRb
is presented. Abundant spectroscopic data on the \astate state were collected
by Fourier-transform spectroscopy which allow to determine an accurate
experimental potential energy curve up to 14.8 \AA . The existing data set (C.
Amiot et al. J. Chem. Phys. 112, 7068 (2000)) on the ground state \Xstate was
extended by several additional levels lying close to the atomic asymptote. In a
coupled channels fitting routine complete molecular potentials for both
electronic states were fitted. Along with the line frequencies of the molecular
transitions, recently published positions of Feshbach resonances in $^{40}$K
and $^{87}$Rb mixtures (F. Ferlaino et al. Phys. Rev. A 74, 039903 (2006)) were
included in the fit. This makes the derived potential curves capable for an
accurate description of observed cold collision features so far. Predictions of
scattering lengths and Feshbach resonances in other isotopic combinations are
reported.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The first and most compelling evidence of the universe's expansion was, and
continues to be, the observed redshift of spectra from distant objects. This
paper plays "devil's advocate" by providing an alternative explanation with
elementary physics. I assume a steady-state universe that is infinite in both
expanse and age, with the observed redshifts caused by particle interactions
creating an overall index of refraction of the universe. The cumulative effects
of these interactions over long distances cause not only the shifts that we
observe, but also the monotonically increasing redshifts as more distant
objects are observed. This is a novel explanation for the phenomenon known as
"tired light" which has been discussed for decades.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We study the voter model with a finite density of zealots--voters than never
change opinion. For equal numbers of zealots of each species, the distribution
of magnetization (opinions) is Gaussian in the mean-field limit as well as in
one and two dimensions, with a width that is proportional to 1/sqrt{Z}, where Z
is the number of zealots, independent of the total number of voters. Thus just
a few zealots can prevent consensus or even the formation of a robust majority.

Categories: physics.acc-ph, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Here we compute the ion distribution produced by an electron beam when
ion-clearing electrodes are installed. This ion density is established as an
equilibrium between gas ionization and ion clearing. The transverse ion
distributions are shown to strongly peak in the beam's center, producing very
nonlinear forces on the electron beam. We will analyze perturbations to the
beam properties by these nonlinear fields. To obtain reasonable simulation
speeds, we develop fast algorithms that take advantage of adiabatic invariants
and scaling properties of Maxwell's equations and the Lorentz force.
  Our results are very relevant for high current Energy Recovery Linacs, where
ions are produced relatively quickly, and where clearing gaps in the electron
beam cannot easily be used for ion elimination. The examples in this paper
therefore use parameters of the Cornell Energy Recovery Linac project. For
simplicity we only consider the case of a circular electron beam of changing
diameter. However, we parameterize this model to approximate non-round beams
well. We find suitable places for clearing electrodes and compute the
equilibrium ion density and its effect on electron-emittance growth and halo
development. We find that it is not sufficient to place clearing electrodes
only at the minimum of the electron beam potential where ions are accumulated.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, q-bio.CB
Abstract: The rules governing cell division and differentiation are central to
understanding the mechanisms of development, aging and cancer. By utilising
inducible genetic labelling, recent studies have shown that the clonal
population in transgenic mouse epidermis can be tracked in vivo. Drawing on
these results, we explain how clonal fate data may be used to infer the rules
of cell division and differentiation underlying the maintenance of adult murine
tail-skin. We show that the rates of cell division and differentiation may be
evaluated by considering the long-time and short-time clone fate data, and that
the data is consistent with cells dividing independently rather than
synchronously. Motivated by these findings, we consider a mechanism for cancer
onset based closely on the model for normal adult skin. By analysing the
expected changes to clonal fate in cancer emerging from a simple two-stage
mutation, we propose that clonal fate data may provide a novel method for
studying the earliest stages of the disease.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Exactly solvable rererence potentials of several smoothly joined Morse-type
components were constructed for the lowest two excimer states of Ar2 molecule.
The parameters of the potentials have been ascertained by fitting to the
experimental data, and they are reliable in a wide range of nuclear
separations. A large number of quantum mechanical Franck-Condon factors for
bound-free and bound-bound transitions have been calculated and compared with
the observed spectroscopic features. The fitting procedure also involved dipole
transition moments, which have been adjusted to the known radiative lifetimes
of the vibrational levels. The resulting potential energy curves accurately
reproduce the first and the second emission continua of Ar2* as well as the
oscillatory spectrum related to their inner turning point region. The numbering
and the positions of the vibrational levels reported by Herman et al. [P. R.
Herman, P. E. LaRocque, and B. P. Stoicheff, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 4535 (1988)]
have been confirmed.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We report experimental and theoretical study of a rotating diode-pumped
Nd-YAG ring laser with active beat note stabilization. Our experimental setup
is described in the usual Maxwell-Bloch formalism. We analytically derive a
stability condition and some frequency response characteristics for the
solid-state ring laser gyroscope, illustrating the important role of mode
coupling effects on the dynamics of such a device. Experimental data are
presented and compared with the theory on the basis of realistic laser
parameters, showing a very good agreement. Our results illustrate the duality
between the very rich non linear dynamics of the diode-pumped solid-state ring
laser (including chaotic behavior) and the possibility to obtain a very stable
beat note, resulting in a potentially new kind of rotation sensor.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The variational method, within the Hamiltonian formalism of reformulated QED
is used to determine relativistic wave equations for a system of three fermions
of arbitrary mass interacting electromagnetically. The interaction kernels of
the equations are, in essence, the invariant $\mathcal{M}$ matrices in lowest
order. The equations are used to obtain relativistic $O(\alpha^2)$ corrections
to the non-relativistic ground state energy levels of the Muonium negative ion
($\mu^+ e^- e^-$) as well as of $\mathrm{Ps}^-$ and $\mathrm{H}^-$, using
approximate variational three-body wave functions. The results are compared
with other calculations, where available. The relativistic correction for
Mu$^-$ is found to be $-1.0773 \times 10^{-4}$ eV.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We demonstrate experimentally that structural perturbations imposed on
highly-dispersive photonic crystal-based waveguides give rise to spectral
features that bear signatures of Anderson localization. Sharp resonances with
the effective Qs of over 30,000 are found in scattering spectra of disordered
waveguides. The resonances are observed in a ~20-nm bandwidth centered at the
cutoff of slowly-guided Bloch-modes. Their origin can be explained with
interference of coherently scattered electromagnetic waves which results in the
formation of a narrow impurity (or localization) band populated with spectrally
distinct quasistates. Standard photon localization criteria are fulfilled in
the localization band.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: We use an acoustic Lagrangian tracking technique, particularly adapted to
measurements in open flows, and a versatile material particles generator (in
the form of soap bubbles with adjustable size and density) to characterize
Lagrangian statistics of finite sized, neutrally bouyant, particles transported
in an isotropic turbulent flow of air. We vary the size of the particles in a
range corresponding to turbulent inertial scales and explore how the turbulent
forcing experienced by the particles depends on their size. We show that, while
the global shape of the intermittent acceleration probability density function
does not depend significantly on particle size, the acceleration variance of
the particles decreases as they become larger in agreement with the classical
scaling for the spectrum of Eulerian pressure fluctuations in the carrier flow.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The resolution associated with the so-called perfect lens of thickness $d$ is
$-2\pi d/\ln(|\chi+2|/2)$. Here the susceptibility $\chi$ is a Hermitian
function in $H^2$ of the upper half-plane, i.e., a $H^2$ function satisfying
$\chi(-\omega)=\bar{\chi(\omega)}$. An additional requirement is that the
imaginary part of $\chi$ be nonnegative for nonnegative arguments. Given an
interval $I$ on the positive half-axis, we compute the distance in
$L^\infty(I)$ from a negative constant to this class of functions. This result
gives a surprisingly simple and explicit formula for the optimal resolution of
the perfect lens on a finite bandwidth.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: Femtosecond PTHB spectroscopy was expected to demonstrate the existence of
distinct s-p absorption subbands originating from the three nondegenerate
p-like excited states of hydrated electron in anisotropic solvation cavity. Yet
no conclusive experimental evidence either for this subband structure or the
reorientation of the cavity on the picosecond time scale has been obtained. We
demonstrate that rapid reorientation of s-p transition dipole moments in
response to small scale motion of water molecules is the likely culprit. The
polarized bleach is shown to be too small and too short lived to be observed
reliably on the sub-picosecond time scale.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The effect of salt concentration Cs on the critical shear rate required for
the onset of shear thickening and apparent relaxation time of the
shear-thickened phase, has been investigated systematically for dilute
CTAB/NaSal solutions. Experimental data suggest a self-similar behavior of the
critical shear rate and relaxation time as functions of Cs. Specifically, the
former ~ Cs^(-6) whereas the latter ~ Cs^(6) such that an effective Weissenberg
number for the onset of the shear thickened phase is only weakly dependent on
Cs. A procedure has been developed to collapse the apparent shear viscosity
versus shear rate data obtained for various values of Cs into a single master
curve. The effect of Cs on the elastic modulus and mesh size of the
shear-induced gel phase for different surfactant concentrations is discussed.
Experiments performed using different flow cells (Couette and cone-and-plate)
show that the critical shear rate, relaxation time and the maximum viscosity
attained are geometry-independent. The elastic modulus of the gel phase
inferred indirectly by employing simplified hydrodynamic instability analysis
of a sheared gel-fluid interface is in qualitative agreement with that
predicted for an entangled phase of living polymers. A qualitative mechanism
that combines the effect of Cs on average micelle length and Debye parameter
with shear-induced configurational changes of rod-like micelles is proposed to
rationalize the self-similarity of SIS formation.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, physics.ao-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: In recent years, advances in computational power and spatial data analysis
(GIS, remote sensing, etc) have led to an increase in attempts to model the
spread and behaviour of wildland fires across the landscape. This series of
review papers endeavours to critically and comprehensively review all types of
surface fire spread models developed since 1990. This paper reviews models of a
physical or quasi-physical nature. These models are based on the fundamental
chemistry and/or physics of combustion and fire spread. Other papers in the
series review models of an empirical or quasi-empirical nature, and
mathematical analogues and simulation models. Many models are extensions or
refinements of models developed before 1990. Where this is the case, these
models are also discussed but much less comprehensively.

Categories: physics.ins-det, hep-ph
Abstract: The importance is emphasized of taking into account the channeling along the
low index crystallographic axes and planes of a part of low-energy (1-10 keV)
recoil ions in measurements of their parameters with crystal scintillators of
the type of NaI(Tl) etc. Because the nucleus stopping power in channels is low
as compared with electronic stopping power, the light yield of the scintillator
must be, accordingly, higher in the given case than that for ions having higher
energy (tens keV and more), which lose most part of their energy via nuclear
collisions outside channels. Hence, in particular, it follows that the DAMA/NaI
observations in Gran Sasso of the annual modulation of the signal frequency in
a narrow range of scintillations with an amplitude of 2-6 keV electron
equivalent may be due to incidence onto the Earth of exceedingly massive
particles (of the type of Planckian objects) from elongated Earth-crossing
heliocentric orbits at a velocity of 30-50 km/s. In NaI(Tl), these particles
create the iodine recoil ions with just the energy of 2-6 keV.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: A strong laser field and the Coulomb field of a nucleus can produce
e^{+}e^{-} pairs. It is shown for the first time that there is a large
probability that electrons and positrons created in this process collide after
one or several oscillations of the laser field. These collisions can take place
at high energy resulting in several phenomena. The quasielastic collision
e^{+}e^{-} -> e^{+}e^{-} allows acceleration of leptons in the laser field to
higher energies. The inelastic collisions allow production of high energy
photons e^{+}e^{-}-> 2 gamma and muons, e^{+}e^{-} -> mu^{+}mu^{-}. The yield
of high-energy photons and muons produced via this mechanism exceeds
exponentially their production through conventional direct creation in laser
and Coulomb fields. A relation of the phenomena considered with the
antenna-mechanism of multiphoton absorption in atoms is discussed.

Categories: physics.comp-ph, physics.optics
Abstract: In the framework of mapped pseudospectral methods, we introduce a new
polynomial-type mapping function in order to describe accurately the dynamics
of systems developing almost singular structures. Using error criteria related
to the spectral interpolation error, the new polynomial-type mapping is
compared against previously proposed mappings for the study of collapse and
shock wave phenomena. As a physical application, we study the dynamics of two
coupled beams, described by coupled nonlinear Schr\"odinger equations and
modeling beam propagation in an atomic coherent media, whose spatial sizes
differs up to several orders of magnitude. It is demonstrated, also by
numerical simulations, that the accuracy properties of the new polynomial-type
mapping outperforms in orders of magnitude the ones of the other studied
mapping functions.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: The wave-front engineering for nonlinear optical interactions was discussed.
Using Huygens-Fresnel principle we developed a general theory and technique for
domain engineering with conventional quasi-phase-matching structures being the
special cases. By Fourier analysis we put forward the concept of local
quasi-phase matching, which suggests that the quasi-phase matching is fulfilled
only locally not globally. Experiments on focal effect of second-harmonic wave
agreed well with the theoretical prediction. The proposed scheme combines three
optical functions: generation, focusing and beam splitting of second-harmonic
wave, thus making the device more compact. Further the proposed scheme can be
used to perform the integration of multi-functional optical properties in
nonlinear photonics, as well as expand the use of nonlinear optical devices.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Adaptive populations such as those in financial markets and distributed
control can be modeled by the Minority Game. We consider how their dynamics
depends on the agents' initial preferences of strategies, when the agents use
linear or quadratic payoff functions to evaluate their strategies. We find that
the fluctuations of the population making certain decisions (the volatility)
depends on the diversity of the distribution of the initial preferences of
strategies. When the diversity decreases, more agents tend to adapt their
strategies together. In systems with linear payoffs, this results in dynamical
transitions from vanishing volatility to a non-vanishing one. For low signal
dimensions, the dynamical transitions for the different signals do not take
place at the same critical diversity. Rather, a cascade of dynamical
transitions takes place when the diversity is reduced. In contrast, no phase
transitions are found in systems with the quadratic payoffs. Instead, a basin
boundary of attraction separates two groups of samples in the space of the
agents' decisions. Initial states inside this boundary converge to small
volatility, while those outside diverge to a large one. Furthermore, when the
preference distribution becomes more polarized, the dynamics becomes more
erratic. All the above results are supported by good agreement between
simulations and theory.

Categories: cs.CR, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In densely populated urban areas WiFi routers form a tightly interconnected
proximity network that can be exploited as a substrate for the spreading of
malware able to launch massive fraudulent attack and affect entire urban areas
WiFi networks. In this paper we consider several scenarios for the deployment
of malware that spreads solely over the wireless channel of major urban areas
in the US. We develop an epidemiological model that takes into consideration
prevalent security flaws on these routers. The spread of such a contagion is
simulated on real-world data for geo-referenced wireless routers. We uncover a
major weakness of WiFi networks in that most of the simulated scenarios show
tens of thousands of routers infected in as little time as two weeks, with the
majority of the infections occurring in the first 24 to 48 hours. We indicate
possible containment and prevention measure to limit the eventual harm of such
an attack.

Categories: cond-mat.dis-nn, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The traditional node percolation map of directed networks is reanalyzed in
terms of edges. In the percolated phase, edges can mainly organize into five
distinct giant connected components, interfaces bridging the communication of
nodes in the strongly connected component and those in the in- and
out-components. Formal equations for the relative sizes in number of edges of
these giant structures are derived for arbitrary joint degree distributions in
the presence of local and two-point correlations. The uncorrelated null model
is fully solved analytically and compared against simulations, finding an
excellent agreement between the theoretical predictions and the edge
percolation map of synthetically generated networks with exponential or
scale-free in-degree distribution and exponential out-degree distribution.
Interfaces, and their internal organization giving place from "hairy ball"
percolation landscapes to bottleneck straits, could bring new light to the
discussion of how structure is interwoven with functionality, in particular in
flow networks.

Categories: math.DG, gr-qc, math.MG, math.OC, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We consider the four-dimensional nonholonomic distribution defined by the
4-potential of the electromagnetic field on the manifold. This distribution has
a metric tensor with the Lorentzian signature $(+,-,-,-)$, therefore, the
causal structure appears as in the general relativity theory. By means of the
Pontryagin's maximum principle we proved that the equations of the horizontal
geodesics for this distribution are the same as the equations of motion of a
charged particle in the general relativity theory. This is a Kaluza -- Klein
problem of classical and quantum physics solved by methods of sub-Lorentzian
geometry. We study the geodesics sphere which appears in a constant magnetic
field and its singular points. Sufficiently long geodesics are not optimal
solutions of the variational problem and define the nonholonomic wavefront.
This wavefront is limited by a convex elliptic cone. We also study variational
principle approach to the problem. The Euler -- Lagrange equations are the same
as those obtained by the Pontryagin's maximum principle if the restriction of
the metric tensor on the distribution is the same.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We discuss techniques that allow for long coherence times in laser
spectroscopy experiments with two trapped ions. We show that for this purpose
not only entangled ions prepared in decoherence-free subspaces can be used but
also a pair of ions that are not entangled but subject to the same kind of
phase noise. We apply this technique to a measurement of the electric
quadrupole moment of the 3d D5/2 state of 40Ca+ and to a measurement of the
linewidth of an ultrastable laser exciting a pair of 40Ca+ ions.

Categories: math-ph, math.MP, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.OT
Abstract: In random walks, the path representation of the Green's function is an
infinite sum over the length of path probability density functions (PDFs). Here
we derive and solve, in Laplace space, the recursion relation for the n order
path PDF for any arbitrarily inhomogeneous semi-Markovian random walk in a
one-dimensional (1D) chain of L states. The recursion relation relates the n
order path PDF to L/2 (round towards zero for an odd L) shorter path PDFs, and
has n independent coefficients that obey a universal formula. The z transform
of the recursion relation straightforwardly gives the generating function for
path PDFs, from which we obtain the Green's function of the random walk, and
derive an explicit expression for any path PDF of the random walk. These
expressions give the most detailed description of arbitrarily inhomogeneous
semi-Markovian random walks in 1D.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.flu-dyn, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: There has been significant recent work which examines a situation where a
thin magnetic layer is `draped' over a core merging into a larger cluster; the
same process also appears to be at work at a bubble rising from the cluster
centre. Such a thin magnetic layer could thermally isolate the core from the
cluster medium, but only if the same shear process which generates the layer
does not later disrupt it. On the other hand, if the magnetized layer can
stabilize against the shear instabilities, then the magnetic layer can have the
additional dynamical effect of reducing the shear-driven mixing of the core's
material during the merger process. These arguments could equally well to
underdense cluster bubbles, which would be even more prone to disruption. While
it is well known that magnetic fields can suppress instabilities, it is less
clear that a thin layer can suppress instabilities on scales significantly
larger than its thickness. Here we consider the stability imparted by a thin
magnetized layer. Such a layer can have a significant stabilizing effect even
on modes with wavelengths much larger than the thickness of the layer l; to
stabilize modes ten times larger requires only that the Alfv\'en speed in the
magnetized layer is comparable to the relevant destabilizing velocity -- the
shear velocity in the case of pure Kelvin-Helmholtz like instability, or a
typical buoyancy velocity in the case of pure Rayleigh-Taylor. We confirm our
calculations with two-dimensional numerical experiments using the Athena code.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: A major challenge of interdisciplinary description of complex system
behaviour is whether real systems of higher complexity levels can be understood
with at least the same degree of objective, "scientific" rigour and
universality as "simple" systems of classical, Newtonian science paradigm. The
problem is reduced to that of arbitrary, many-body interaction (unsolved in
standard theory). Here we review its causally complete solution, the ensuing
concept of complexity and applications. The discovered key properties of
dynamic multivaluedness and entanglement give rise to a qualitatively new kind
of mathematical structure providing the exact version of real system behaviour.
The extended mathematics of complexity contains the truly universal definition
of dynamic complexity, randomness (chaoticity), classification of all possible
dynamic regimes, and the unifying principle of any system dynamics and
evolution, the universal symmetry of complexity. Every real system has a
non-zero (and actually high) value of unreduced dynamic complexity determining,
in particular, "mysterious" behaviour of quantum systems and relativistic
effects causally explained now as unified manifestations of complex interaction
dynamics. The observed differences between various systems are due to different
regimes and levels of their unreduced dynamic complexity. We outline
applications of universal concept of dynamic complexity emphasising cases of
"truly complex" systems from higher complexity levels (ecological and living
systems, brain operation, intelligence and consciousness, autonomic information
and communication systems) and show that the urgently needed progress in social
and intellectual structure of civilisation inevitably involves qualitative
transition to unreduced complexity understanding (we call it "revolution of
complexity").

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The models of the Internet reported in the literature are mainly aimed at
reproducing the scale-free structure, the high clustering coefficient and the
small world effects found in the real Internet, while other important
properties (e.g. related to centrality and hierarchical measurements) are not
considered. For a better characterization and modeling of such network, a
larger number of topological properties must be considered. In this work, we
present a sound multivariate statistical approach, including feature spaces and
multivariate statistical analysis (especially canonical projections), in order
to characterize several Internet models while considering a larger set of
relevant measurements. We apply such a methodology to determine, among nine
complex networks models, which are those most compatible with the real Internet
data (on the autonomous systems level) considering a set of 21 network
measurements. We conclude that none of the considered models can reproduce the
Internet topology with high accuracy.

Categories: nlin.PS, cond-mat.soft, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: A dynamical theory of geophysical precipitation pattern formation is
presented and applied to irreversible calcium carbonate (travertine)
deposition. Specific systems studied here are the terraces and domes observed
at geothermal hot springs, such as those at Yellowstone National Park, and
speleothems, particularly stalactites and stalagmites. The theory couples the
precipitation front dynamics with shallow water flow, including corrections for
turbulent drag and curvature effects. In the absence of capillarity and with a
laminar flow profile, the theory predicts a one-parameter family of steady
state solutions to the moving boundary problem describing the precipitation
front. These shapes match well the measured shapes near the vent at the top of
observed travertine domes. Closer to the base of the dome, the solutions
deviate from observations, and circular symmetry is broken by a fluting
pattern, which we show is associated with capillary forces causing thin film
break-up. We relate our model to that recently proposed for stalactite growth,
and calculate the linear stability spectrum of both travertine domes and
stalactites. Lastly, we apply the theory to the problem of precipitation
pattern formation arising from turbulent flow down an inclined plane, and
identify a linear instability that underlies scale-invariant travertine terrace
formation at geothermal hot springs.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: A formalism is presented to obtain closed evolution equations for asymptotic
probability distribution functions of turbulence magnitudes. The formalism is
derived for a generic evolution equation, so that the final result can be
easily applied to rather general problems. Although the approximation involved
cannot be ascertained a priori, we show that application of the formalism to
well known problems gives the correct results.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Relativistic rapidity is usually presented as a computational device. As
Levy-Leblond has shown, it is also the velocity that would be imputed by an
ideal Newtonian inertial guidance system, taking c=1*neper=1. Here, we show
that it can also be interpreted as the change in musical pitch of radiation
fore and aft along the direction of motion.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: Crab cavities have been installed in the KEKB B--Factory rings to compensate
the crossing angle at the collision point and thus increase luminosity. The
beam operation with crab crossing has been done since February 2007. This is
the first experience with such cavities in colliders or storage rings. The crab
cavities have been working without serious issues. While higher specific
luminosity than the geometrical gain has been achieved, further study is
necessary and under way to reach the prediction of simulation.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: This paper presents a method to register a pre-operative Computed-Tomography
(CT) volume to a sparse set of intra-operative Ultra-Sound (US) slices. In the
context of percutaneous renal puncture, the aim is to transfer planning
information to an intra-operative coordinate system. The spatial position of
the US slices is measured by optically localizing a calibrated probe. Assuming
the reproducibility of kidney motion during breathing, and no deformation of
the organ, the method consists in optimizing a rigid 6 Degree Of Freedom (DOF)
transform by evaluating at each step the similarity between the set of US
images and the CT volume. The correlation between CT and US images being
naturally rather poor, the images have been preprocessed in order to increase
their similarity. Among the similarity measures formerly studied in the context
of medical image registration, Correlation Ratio (CR) turned out to be one of
the most accurate and appropriate, particularly with the chosen non-derivative
minimization scheme, namely Powell-Brent's. The resulting matching transforms
are compared to a standard rigid surface registration involving segmentation,
regarding both accuracy and repeatability. The obtained results are presented
and discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: Using a quantum mechanical three-step model we present numerical calculations
on the high-harmonic generation from four polyatomic molecules. Ethylene
(C$_2$H$_4$) serves as an example where orbital symmetry directly affects the
harmonic yield. We treat the case of methane (CH$_4$) to address the
high-harmonic generation resulting from a molecule with degenerate orbitals. To
this end we illustrate how the single orbital contributions show up in the
total high-harmonic signal. This example illustrates the importance of adding
coherently amplitude contributions from the individual degenerate orbitals.
Finally, we study the high-harmonic generation from propane (C$_3$H$_8$) and
butane (C$_4$H$_{10}$). These two molecules, being extended and far from
spherical in structure, produce harmonics with non-trivial orientational
dependencies. In particular, propane can be oriented so that very
high-frequency harmonics are favorized, and thus the molecule contains
prospects for the generation of UV attosecond pulses.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: A scintillating fibre tracker is proposed to measure elastic proton
scattering at very small angles in the ATLAS experiment at CERN. The tracker
will be located in so-called Roman Pot units at a distance of 240 m on each
side of the ATLAS interaction point. An initial validation of the design
choices was achieved in a beam test at DESY in a relatively low energy electron
beam and using slow off-the-shelf electronics. Here we report on the results
from a second beam test experiment carried out at CERN, where new detector
prototypes were tested in a high energy hadron beam, using the first version of
the custom designed front-end electronics. The results show an adequate
tracking performance under conditions which are similar to the situation at the
LHC. In addition, the alignment method using so-called overlap detectors was
studied and shown to have the expected precision.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We review the case for the photon having a tiny mass compatible with the
experimental limits. We go over some possible experimental tests for such a
photon mass including the violation of Lorentz symmetry. We point out that such
violations may already have been witnessed in tests involving high energy gamma
rays from outer space as also ultra high energy cosmic rays.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The recent discovery of unstable travelling waves (TWs) in pipe flow has been
hailed as a significant breakthrough with the hope that they populate the
turbulent attractor. We confirm the existence of coherent states with internal
fast and slow streaks commensurate in both structure and energy with known TWs
using numerical simulations in a long pipe. These only occur, however, within
less energetic regions of (localized) `puff' turbulence at low Reynolds numbers
(Re=2000-2400), and not at all in (homogeneous) `slug' turbulence at Re=2800.
This strongly suggests that all currently known TWs sit in an intermediate
region of phase space between the laminar and turbulent states rather than
being embedded within the turbulent attractor itself. New coherent fast streak
states with strongly decelerated cores appear to populate the turbulent
attractor instead.

Categories: physics.med-ph
Abstract: OBJECTIVES: The aim of this paper is to introduce the principles of
computer-assisted access to the kidney. The system provides the surgeon with a
pre-operative 3D planning on computed tomography (CT) images. After a rigid
registration with space-localized ultrasound (US) data, preoperative planning
can be transferred to the intra-operative conditions and an intuitive
man-machine interface allows the user to perform a puncture. MATERIAL AND
METHODS: Both CT and US images of informed normal volunteer were obtained to
perform calculation on the accuracy of registration and punctures were carried
out on a kidney phantom to measure the precision of the whole of the system.
RESULTS: We carried out millimetric registrations on real data and guidance
experiments on a kidney phantom showed encouraging results of 4.7 mm between
planned and reached targets. We noticed that the most significant error was
related to the needle deflection during the puncture. CONCLUSION: Preliminary
results are encouraging. Further work will be undertaken to improve efficiency
and accuracy, and to take breathing into account.

Categories: math.HO, physics.ed-ph
Abstract: This is a missing chapter from Hans Magnus Enzensberger's mathematical
adventure The Number Devil (Henry Holt and Company, New York, 1997). In the
book, a math-hating boy named Robert is visited in his dreams by the clever
Number Devil, who teaches him to love all things numerical. However, we all
forget our dreams from time to time. Here is one adventure that Enzensberger
overlooked, where the Number Devil introduces Robert to geometry not-of-Euclid,
great circles, parallel transport, the pendulum of Foucault, and the genius of
Euler.

Categories: physics.ao-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: We present a new statistical method to optimally link local weather extremes
to large-scale atmospheric circulation structures. The method is illustrated
using July-August daily mean temperature at 2m height (T2m) time-series over
the Netherlands and 500 hPa geopotential height (Z500) time-series over the
Euroatlantic region of the ECMWF reanalysis dataset (ERA40). The method
identifies patterns in the Z500 time-series that optimally describe, in a
precise mathematical sense, the relationship with local warm extremes in the
Netherlands. Two patterns are identified; the most important one corresponds to
a blocking high pressure system leading to subsidence and calm, dry and sunny
conditions over the Netherlands. The second one corresponds to a rare, easterly
flow regime bringing warm, dry air into the region. The patterns are robust;
they are also identified in shorter subsamples of the total dataset. The method
is generally applicable and might prove useful in evaluating the performance of
climate models in simulating local weather extremes.

Categories: math-ph, cond-mat.stat-mech, hep-th, math.MP, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: We introduce some multiple integrals that are expected to have the same
singularities as the singularities of the $ n$-particle contributions
$\chi^{(n)}$ to the susceptibility of the square lattice Ising model. We find
the Fuchsian linear differential equation satisfied by these multiple integrals
for $ n=1, 2, 3, 4$ and only modulo some primes for $ n=5$ and $ 6$, thus
providing a large set of (possible) new singularities of the $\chi^{(n)}$. We
discuss the singularity structure for these multiple integrals by solving the
Landau conditions. We find that the singularities of the associated ODEs
identify (up to $n= 6$) with the leading pinch Landau singularities. The second
remarkable obtained feature is that the singularities of the ODEs associated
with the multiple integrals reduce to the singularities of the ODEs associated
with a {\em finite number of one dimensional integrals}. Among the
singularities found, we underline the fact that the quadratic polynomial
condition $ 1+3 w +4 w^2 = 0$, that occurs in the linear differential equation
of $ \chi^{(3)}$, actually corresponds to a remarkable property of selected
elliptic curves, namely the occurrence of complex multiplication. The
interpretation of complex multiplication for elliptic curves as complex fixed
points of the selected generators of the renormalization group, namely
isogenies of elliptic curves, is sketched. Most of the other singularities
occurring in our multiple integrals are not related to complex multiplication
situations, suggesting an interpretation in terms of (motivic) mathematical
structures beyond the theory of elliptic curves.

Categories: physics.data-an
Abstract: Motivated by the recent demonstration of its use as a tool for the detection
and characterization of phase-shape correlations in multivariate time series,
we show that eigenvalue decomposition can also be applied to a matrix of
indices of bivariate phase synchronization strength. The resulting method is
able to identify clusters of synchronized oscillators, and to quantify their
strength as well as the degree of involvement of an oscillator in a cluster.
Since for the case of a single cluster the method gives similar results as our
previous approach, it can be seen as a generalized Synchronization Cluster
Analysis, extending its field of application to more complex situations. The
performance of the method is tested by applying it to simulation data.

Categories: physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The comprehensive characterization of the structure of complex networks is
essential to understand the dynamical processes which guide their evolution.
The discovery of the scale-free distribution and the small world property of
real networks were fundamental to stimulate more realistic models and to
understand some dynamical processes such as network growth. However, properties
related to the network borders (nodes with degree equal to one), one of its
most fragile parts, remain little investigated and understood. The border nodes
may be involved in the evolution of structures such as geographical networks.
Here we analyze complex networks by looking for border trees, which are defined
as the subgraphs without cycles connected to the remainder of the network
(containing cycles) and terminating into border nodes. In addition to
describing an algorithm for identification of such tree subgraphs, we also
consider a series of their measurements, including their number of vertices,
number of leaves, and depth. We investigate the properties of border trees for
several theoretical models as well as real-world networks.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: The resolution of X-ray diffraction microscopy is limited by the maximum dose
that can be delivered prior to sample damage. In the proposed Serial
Crystallography method, the damage problem is addressed by distributing the
total dose over many identical hydrated macromolecules running continuously in
a single-file train across a continuous X-ray beam, and resolution is then
limited only by the available molecular and X-ray fluxes and molecular
alignment. Orientation of the diffracting molecules is achieved by laser
alignment. We evaluate the incident X-ray fluence (energy/area) required to
obtain a given resolution from (1) an analytical model, giving the count rate
at the maximum scattering angle for a model protein, (2) explicit simulation of
diffraction patterns for a GroEL-GroES protein complex, and (3) the frequency
cut off of the transfer function following iterative solution of the phase
problem, and reconstruction of an electron density map in the projection
approximation. These calculations include counting shot noise and multiple
starts of the phasing algorithm. The results indicate counting time and the
number of proteins needed within the beam at any instant for a given resolution
and X-ray flux. We confirm an inverse fourth power dependence of exposure time
on resolution, with important implications for all coherent X-ray imaging. We
find that multiple single-file protein beams will be needed for sub-nanometer
resolution on current third generation synchrotrons, but not on fourth
generation designs, where reconstruction of secondary protein structure at a
resolution of 0.7 nm should be possible with short exposures.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: This paper has been withdrawn by the author(s), due a crucial sign error in
Eqn. 1.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.space-ph
Abstract: The effect of gravitation field of spherically symmetric mass on the
birefringent properties of crystals has been analysed. It has been shown that
the gravitation field with spherical symmetry can lead to a change of
birefringence in anisotropic media.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The coherent control of scattering processes is considered, with electron
impact dissociation of H$_2^+$ used as an example. The physical mechanism
underlying coherently controlled stationary state scattering is exposed by
analyzing a control scenario that relies on previously established entanglement
requirements between the scattering partners. Specifically, initial state
entanglement assures that all collisions in the scattering volume yield the
desirable scattering configuration. Scattering is controlled by preparing the
particular internal state wave function that leads to the favored collisional
configuration in the collision volume. This insight allows coherent control to
be extended to the case of time-dependent scattering. Specifically, we identify
reactive scattering scenarios using incident wave packets of translational
motion where coherent control is operational and initial state entanglement is
unnecessary. Both the stationary and time-dependent scenarios incorporate
extended coherence features, making them physically distinct. From a
theoretical point of view, this work represents a large step forward in the
qualitative understanding of coherently controlled reactive scattering. From an
experimental viewpoint, it offers an alternative to entanglement-based control
schemes. However, both methods present significant challenges to existing
experimental technologies.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We examine the attosecond electron recollision dissociation of D2+ recently
demonstrated experimentally [H. Niikura et al., Nature (London) 421, 826
(2003)] from a coherent control perspective. In this process, a strong laser
field incident on D2 ionizes an electron, accelerates the electron in the laser
field to eV energies, and then drives the electron to recollide with the parent
ion, causing D2+ dissociation. A number of results are demonstrated. First, a
full dimensional Strong Field Approximation (SFA) model is constructed and
shown to be in agreement with the original experiment. This is then used to
rigorously demonstrate that the experiment is an example of coherent pump-dump
control. Second, extensions to bichromatic coherent control are proposed by
considering dissociative recollision of molecules prepared in a coherent
superposition of vibrational states. Third, by comparing the results to similar
scenarios involving field-free attosecond scattering of independently prepared
D2+ and electron wave packets, recollision dissociation is shown to provide an
example of wave-packet coherent control of reactive scattering. Fourth, this
analysis makes clear that it is the temporal correlations between the continuum
electron and D2+ wave packet, and not entanglement, that are crucial for the
sub-femtosecond probing resolution demonstrated in the experiment. This result
clarifies some misconceptions regarding the importance of entanglement in the
recollision probing of D2+. Finally, signatures of entanglement between the
recollision electron and the atomic fragments, detectable via coincidence
measurements, are identified.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This is a philosophy paper rather than mathematical physics work. I will
publish it in some other place.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Many real networks share three generic properties: they are scale-free,
display a small-world effect, and show a power-law strength-degree correlation.
In this paper, we propose a type of deterministically growing networks called
Sierpinski networks, which are induced by the famous Sierpinski fractals and
constructed in a simple iterative way. We derive analytical expressions for
degree distribution, strength distribution, clustering coefficient, and
strength-degree correlation, which agree well with the characterizations of
various real-life networks. Moreover, we show that the introduced Sierpinski
networks are maximal planar graphs.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The exact formula for the average path length of Apollonian networks is
found. With the help of recursion relations derived from the self-similar
structure, we obtain the exact solution of average path length, $\bar{d}_t$,
for Apollonian networks. In contrast to the well-known numerical result
$\bar{d}_t \propto (\ln N_t)^{3/4}$ [Phys. Rev. Lett. \textbf{94}, 018702
(2005)], our rigorous solution shows that the average path length grows
logarithmically as $\bar{d}_t \propto \ln N_t$ in the infinite limit of network
size $N_t$. The extensive numerical calculations completely agree with our
closed-form solution.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: We show that the principle of entropy increase may be exactly founded on a
few axioms valid not only for quantum and classical statistics, but also for a
wide range of statistical processes.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: Gaseous detectors are fundamental components of all present and planned high
energy physics experiments.
  Over the past decade two representatives (GEM, Micromegas) of the
Micro-Pattern Gas Detector (MPGD) concept have become increasingly important;
the high radiation resistance and excellent spatial and time resolution make
them an invaluable tool to confront future detector challenges at the next
generation of colliders.
  Novel structures where GEM and Micromegas are directly coupled to the CMOS
multi-pixel readout represent an exciting field and allow to reconstruct
fine-granularity, two-dimensional images of physics events. Originally
developed for the high energy physics, MPGD applications have expanded to
astrophysics, neutrino physics, neutron detection and medical imaging.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: A distinction in reasons and motives for choosing a particular political
leader establishes the key difference between older and young democracy. The
former is based on electoral history, while the latter is based on feelings and
personal attitude. Besides, a comparatively abundant number of political
figures (persons or parties and associations) is specific for young
democracies. The problem of a reference votes' distribution is analyzed.
Lefevbre's theory of a reflexive control is supposed to make the basis for
indifferent choice of political figures. This theory yields a golden section
split of votes (or the series of Fibonacci numbers, for the case of multiple
choice). A typology of political campaigns based on this theory is proposed. A
proximity of ratings of competing persons means the highest electoral tension,
a leadership of a person means a high level of mobilization; a neutral
situation corresponds to Fibonacci numbers distribution of votes.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: We study experimentally the slow growth of a single crack in polycarbonate
films submitted to uniaxial and constant imposed stress. For this visco-plastic
material, we uncover a dynamical law that describes the dependence of the
instantaneous crack velocity with experimental parameters. The law involves a
Dugdale-Barenblatt static description of crack tip plastic zones associated to
an Eyring's law and an empirical dependence with the crack length that may come
from a residual elastic field.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: I describe a method for generating "shim pulses" for NMR spectroscopy and
imaging (MRI) by taking advantage of the inherent inhomogeneity in the static
and radiofrequency (RF) fields of a one-sided NMR system. The RF inhomogeneity
here is assumed, without loss of generality, to be a linear gradient. General
polynomials in the spatial variables can be generated using x, y and z RF
gradients using trains of hard pulses which result in linear combinations of
monomials xy, y^2, xz etc., and any desired scalings of these monomials. The
basic shim pulse is constructed using small tip angle approximations.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Motivated by the intriguing motility of spirochetes (helically-shaped
bacteria that screw through viscous fluids due to the action of internal
periplasmic flagella), we examine the fundamental fluid dynamics of
superhelices translating and rotating in a Stokes fluid. A superhelical
structure may be thought of as a helix whose axial centerline is not straight,
but also a helix. We examine the particular case where these two superimposed
helices have different handedness, and employ a combination of experimental,
analytic, and computational methods to determine the rotational velocity of
superhelical bodies being towed through a very viscous fluid. We find that the
direction and rate of the rotation of the body is a result of competition
between the two superimposed helices; for small axial helix amplitude, the body
dynamics is controlled by the short-pitched helix, while there is a cross-over
at larger amplitude to control by the axial helix. We find far better, and
excellent, agreement of our experimental results with numerical computations
based upon the method of Regularized Stokeslets than upon the predictions of
classical resistive force theory.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: A Galerkin finite element (FEM) formulation for the Bloch equations with
dipolar field is presented which makes possible the derivation of weak
solutions to the Bloch equations. The FEM formulation has the advantage that
the equations of motion are local in real space, eliminating the global
truncation errors associated with calculations of the dipolar field in Fourier
space. The dipolar field and other geometric parameters are calculated only
once, before the simulation, and used as an initial condition rather than
re-calculated at every time step of some numerical integration.

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We present experiments on the slow growth of a single crack in a fax paper
sheet submitted to a constant force $F$. We find that statistically averaged
crack growth curves can be described by only two parameters : the mean rupture
time $\tau$ and a characteristic growth length $\zeta$. We propose a model
based on a thermally activated rupture process that takes into account the
microstructure of cellulose fibers. The model is able to reproduce the shape of
the growth curve, the dependence of $\zeta$ on $F$ as well as the effect of
temperature on the rupture time $\tau$. We find that the length scale at which
rupture occurs in this model is consistently close to the diameter of cellulose
microfibrils.

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Using a high speed camera, we study the peeling dynamics of an adhesive tape
under a constant load with a special focus on the so-called stick-slip regime
of the peeling. It is the first time that the very fast motion of the peeling
point is imaged. The speed of the camera, up to 16000 fps, allows us to observe
and quantify the details of the peeling point motion during the stick and slip
phases: stick and slip velocities, durations and amplitudes. First, in contrast
with previous observations, the stick-slip regime appears to be only transient
in the force controlled peeling. Additionally, we discover that the stick and
slip phases have similar durations and that at high mean peeling velocity, the
slip phase actually lasts longer than the stick phase. Depending on the mean
peeling velocity, we also observe that the velocity change between stick and
slip phase ranges from a rather sudden to a smooth transition. These new
observations can help to discriminate between the various assumptions used in
theoretical models for describing the complex peeling of an adhesive tape. The
present imaging technique opens the door for an extensive study of the velocity
controlled stick-slip peeling of an adhesive tape that will allow to understand
the statistical complexity of the stick-slip in a stationary case.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We present a detailed comparison of two self-consistent equation-of-state
models which differ from their electronic contribution: the atom in a spherical
cell and the atom in a jellium of charges. It is shown that both models are
well suited for the calculation of Hugoniot shock adiabats in the high pressure
range (1 Mbar-10 Gbar), and that the atom-in-a-jellium model provides a better
treatment of pressure ionization. Comparisons with experimental data are also
presented. Shell effects on shock adiabats are reviewed in the light of these
models. They lead to additional features not only in the variations of pressure
versus density, but also in the variations of shock velocity versus particle
velocity. Moreover, such effects are found to be responsible for enhancement of
the electronic specific heat.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: Starting from the resurgence equation discovered by Berry and Howls [M. V.
Berry and C. Howls "Hyperasymptotics for integrals with saddles," Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. A 434, 657-675 (1991)], the Weniger transformation is here proposed as a
natural, efficient, and straightforwardly implementable scheme for the
efficient asymptotics evaluation of a class of integrals occurring in several
areas of physics and, in particular, of optics. Preliminary numerical tests,
carried out on the Pearcey function, provide a direct comparison between the
performances of Weniger transformation and those of Hyperasymptotics, which
seems to corroborate the theoretical predictions. We believe that Weniger
transformation would be a very useful computational tool for the asymptotic
treatment of several optical problems.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: We predict that parametric sum-frequency generation of an ultra-short pulse
may result from the mixing of an ultra-short optical pulse with a
quasi-continuous wave control. We analytically show that the intensity, time
duration and group velocity of the generated idler pulse may be controlled in a
stable manner by adjusting the intensity level of the background pump.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We examine the relation between the recently proposed time-dependent quantum
Monte Carlo (TDQMC) method and the principles of stochastic quantization. In
both TDQMC and stochastic quantization particle motion obeys stochastic
guidance equations to preserve quantum equilibrium. In this way the probability
density of the Monte Carlo particles corresponds to the modulus square of the
many-body wave function at all times. However, in TDQMC the motion of particles
and guide waves occurs in physical space unlike in stochastic quantization
where it occurs in configuration space. Hence the practical calculation of time
evolution of many-body fully correlated quantum systems becomes feasible within
the TDQMC methodology. We illustrate the TDQMC technique by calculating the
symmetric and antisymmetric ground state of a model one-dimensional Helium
atom, and the time evolution of the dipole moment when the atom is irradiated
by a strong ultrashort laser pulse.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: A model of dense plasmas relying on the superconfiguration approximation is
presented. In each superconfiguration the nucleus is totally screened by the
electrons in a Wigner-Seitz sphere (ion-sphere model). Superconfigurations of
the same charge are grouped into ions. It is shown that boundary values of the
wavefunctions play a crucial role in the form of the Virial theorem from which
the pressure formula is derived. Finally, a condition is presented and
discussed, which makes the ion-sphere model variational when bound electrons
are treated quantum-mechanically and free electrons quasi-classically.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, q-bio.CB
Abstract: We show that the critical mass M_c=8\pi of bacterial populations in two
dimensions in the chemotactic problem is the counterpart of the critical
temperature T_c=GMm/4k_B of self-gravitating Brownian particles in
two-dimensional gravity. We obtain these critical values by using the Virial
theorem or by considering stationary solutions of the Keller-Segel model and
Smoluchowski-Poisson system. We also consider the case of one dimensional
systems and develop the connection with the Burgers equation. Finally, we
discuss the evolution of the system as a function of M or T in bounded and
unbounded domains in dimensions d=1, 2 and 3 and show the specificities of each
dimension. This paper aims to point out the numerous analogies between
bacterial populations, self-gravitating Brownian particles and, occasionally,
two-dimensional vortices.

Categories: physics.ins-det, physics.med-ph
Abstract: A new idea on electrostatic deviation and capture of back-drifting
avalanche-ions in cascaded gaseous hole-multipliers is presented. It involves a
flipped reversed-bias Micro-Hole & Strip Plate (F-R-MHSP) element, the strips
of which are facing the drift region of the multiplier. The ions, originating
from successive multiplication stages, are efficiently deviated and captured by
such electrode. Experimental results are provided comparing the ion-blocking
capability of the F-R-MHSP to that of the reversed-bias Micro-Hole & Strip
Plate (R-MHSP) and the Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM). Best ion-blocking results
in cascaded hole-multipliers were reached with a detector having the F-R-MHSP
as the first multiplication element. A three-element F-R-MHSP/GEM/MHSP cascaded
multiplier operated in atmospheric-pressure Ar/CH4 (95/5), at total gain of
~10^{5}, yielded ion back-flow fractions of 3*10^{-4} and 1.5*10^{-4}, at drift
fields of 0.5 and 0.2 kV/cm, respectively. We describe the F-R-MHSP concept and
the relevance of the obtained ion back-flow fractions to various applications;
further ideas are also discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, nucl-th
Abstract: The interaction of orbital electrons with the charge and magnetic moment of
the nucleus polarizes it, and the detailed description requires a careful
treatment of the nuclear vector polarizability. We present a complete and
closed form expression for the resulting contribution to hyperfine splitting in
light atomic systems.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The sun's role in the earth's recent warming remains controversial even
though there is a good deal of evidence to support the thesis that solar
variations are a very significant factor in driving climate change both
currently and in the past. This precis lays out the background and data needed
to understand the basic scientific argument behind the contention that
variations in solar output have a significant impact on current changes in
climate. It also offers a simple, phenomenological approach for estimating the
actual-as opposed to model dependent-magnitude of the sun's influence on
climate.

Categories: physics.data-an, astro-ph
Abstract: The paper comments on properties of the so-called "Unified approach to the
construction of classical confidence intervals", in which confidence intervals
are computed in a Neyman construction using the likelihood ratio as ordering
quantity. In particular, two of the main results of a paper by Feldman and
Cousins (F&C) are discussed. It is shown that in the case of central intervals
the so-called flip-flopping problem, occuring in the specific scenario where
the experimenter decides to quote a standard upper limit or a confidence
interval depending on the measurement, can be easily avoided by choosing
appropriate confidence levels for the standard upper limits and confidence
intervals. In the F&C paper "upper limit" is defined as the upper edge of a
confidence interval, whose lower edge coincides with the physical limit. With
this definition of upper limit (F&C limit), in an approach which uses the
likelihood ratio as ordering quantity, two-sided confidence intervals
automatically change over to "upper limits" as the signal becomes weaker
(Unified approach). In the present paper it is pointed out that this behaviour
is not a special property of this approach, because approaches with other
ordering principles, like central intervals, symmetric intervals or
highest-probability intervals, exhibit the same behaviour. The Unified approach
is presented in the F&C paper as a solution to the flip-flopping problem. This
might suggest that the F&C limit is a standard upper limit. In order to exclude
any misunderstanding, it is proposed in the present paper to call the F&C limit
"upper edge of the confidence interval", even if its lower edge coincides with
the physical limit.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: The partition function for two-dimensional nearest neighbour Ising models in
the presence of a magnetic field is derived . A comparison with the partition
functions predicted by Onsager is carried out. The critical temperature
estimated by two different methods yields good agreement with the result of
Yang and Lee.

Categories: q-bio.PE, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: The spatial structure of populations is a key element in the understanding of
the large scale spreading of epidemics. Motivated by the recent empirical
evidence on the heterogeneous properties of transportation and commuting
patterns among urban areas, we present a thorough analysis of the behavior of
infectious diseases in metapopulation models characterized by heterogeneous
connectivity and mobility patterns. We derive the basic reaction-diffusion
equation describing the metapopulation system at the mechanistic level and
derive an early stage dynamics approximation for the subpopulation invasion
dynamics. The analytical description uses degree block variables that allows us
to take into account arbitrary degree distribution of the metapopulation
network. We show that along with the usual single population epidemic threshold
the metapopulation network exhibits a global threshold for the subpopulation
invasion. We find an explicit analytic expression for the invasion threshold
that determines the minimum number of individuals traveling among
subpopulations in order to have the infection of a macroscopic number of
subpopulations. The invasion threshold is a function of factors such as the
basic reproductive number, the infectious period and the mobility process and
it is found to decrease for increasing network heterogeneity. We provide
extensive mechanistic numerical Monte Carlo simulations that recover the
analytical finding in a wide range of metapopulation network connectivity
patterns. The results can be useful in the understanding of recent data driven
computational approaches to disease spreading in large transportation networks
and the effect of containment measures such as travel restrictions.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We report experimental measurements of the transmission spectrum of an
optical cavity coupled with cold Rb atoms. We observe the multi-atom vacuum
Rabi splitting of a composite cavity and atom system. When a coupling field is
applied to the atoms and induces the resonant two-photon Raman transition with
the cavity field in a Lamda-type three-level system, we observe a cavity
transmission spectrum with two vacuum Rabi sidebands and a central peak
representing the intracavity dark state. The central peak linewidth is
significantly narrowed by the dark-state resonance and its position is
insensitive to the frequency change of the empty cavity.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, physics.bio-ph, physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: Purcell's scallop theorem defines the type of motions of a solid body -
reciprocal motions - which cannot propel the body in a viscous fluid with zero
Reynolds number. For example, the flapping of a wing is reciprocal and, as was
recently shown, can lead to directed motion only if its frequency Reynolds
number, Re_f, is above a critical value of order one. Using elementary
examples, we show the existence of oscillatory reciprocal motions which are
effective for all arbitrarily small values of the frequency Reynolds number and
induce net velocities scaling as (Re_f)^\alpha (alpha > 0). This demonstrates a
continuous breakdown of the scallop theorem with inertia.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: The curvature field is measured from tracer particle trajectories in a
two-dimensional fluid flow that exhibits spatiotemporal chaos, and is used to
extract the hyperbolic and elliptic points of the flow. These special points
are pinned to the forcing when the driving is weak, but wander over the domain
and interact in pairs at stronger driving, changing the local topology of the
flow. Their behavior reveals a two-stage transition to spatiotemporal chaos: a
gradual loss of spatial and temporal order followed by an abrupt onset of
topological changes.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.flu-dyn, q-bio.TO
Abstract: The notion of tissue surface tension has provided a physical understanding of
morphogenetic phenomena such as tissue spreading or cell sorting. The
measurement of tissue surface tension so far relied on strong approximations on
the geometric profile of a spherical droplet compressed between parallel
plates. We solved the Laplace equation for this geometry and tested its
solution on true liquids and embryonic tissue fragments as well as
multicellular aggregates. The analytic solution provides the surface tension in
terms of easily and accurately measurable geometric parameters. Experimental
results show that the various tissues and multicellular aggregates studied here
are incompressible and, similarly to true liquids, possess effective surface
tensions that are independent of the magnitude of the compressive force and the
volume of the droplet.

Categories: physics.optics
Abstract: Sets of orthogonal basis functions over two-dimensional circular areas--most
often representing pupils in optical applications--are known in the literature
for the full circle (Zernike or Jacobi polynomials) and the annulus. This work
proposes an orthogonal set if the area is two non-overlapping circular pupils
of same size. The major free parameter is the ratio of the pupil radii over the
distance between both circles. Increasingly higher order aberrations--as
defined for a virtual larger pupil in which both pupils are embedded--are fed
into a Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization to implement one unique set of basis
functions. The key element is to work out the overlap integrals between a full
set of primitive basis functions (products of powers of the distance from the
mid-point between both pupils by azimuthal functions of the Fourier type).

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Two-frequency radiative transfer (2f-RT) theory is developed for geometrical
optics in random media. The space-frequency correlation is described by the
two-frequency Wigner distribution (2f-WD) which satisfies a closed form
equation, the two-frequency Wigner-Moyal equation. In the RT regime it is
proved rigorously that 2f-WD satisfies a Fokker-Planck-like equation with
complex-valued coefficients. By dimensional analysis 2f-RT equation yields the
scaling behavior of three physical parameters: the spatial spread, the
coherence length and the coherence bandwidth. The sub-transport-mean-free-path
behavior is obtained in a closed form by analytically solving a paraxial 2f-RT
equation.

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We study experimentally the slow growth of a single crack in polycarbonate
films submitted to uniaxial and constant imposed stress. The specificity of
fracture in polycarbonate films is the appearance of flame shaped macroscopic
process zones at the tips of the crack. Supported by an experimental study of
the mechanical properties of polycarbonate films, an analysis of the stress
dependence of the mean ratio between the process zone and crack lengths, during
the crack growth, show a quantitative agreement with the Dugdale-Barenblatt
model of the plastic process zone. We find that the fracture growth curves obey
strong scaling properties that lead to a well defined growth master curve.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, physics.comp-ph, q-bio.CB, q-bio.TO
Abstract: A distinguishing feature of a multicellular living system is that it operates
at various scales, from the intracellular to organismal. Very little is known
at present on how tissue level properties are related to cell and subcellular
properties. Modern measurement techniques provide quantitative results at both
the intracellular and tissue level, but not on the connection between these. In
the present work we outline a framework to address this connection. We
specifically concentrate on the morphogenetic process of tissue fusion, by
following the coalescence of two contiguous multicellular aggregates. The time
evolution of this process can accurately be described by the theory of viscous
liquids. We also study fusion by Monte Carlo simulations and a novel Cellular
Particle Dynamics (CPD) model, which is similar to the earlier introduced
Subcellular Element Model (Newman, 2005). Using the combination of experiments,
theory and modeling we are able to relate the measured tissue level biophysical
quantities to subcellular parameters. Our approach has validity beyond the
particular morphogenetic process considered here and provides a general way to
relate biophysical properties across scales.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The Very Forward Proton Spectrometer (VFPS) of the H1 experiment at HERA is
collecting data since 2005. The fiber detectors in the Roman pots located at
218 and 222m downstream from the H1 interaction point, tag and measure
diffractively scattered protons with a high acceptance in the $\xpom$ range
[0.01, 0.025]. The experimental set up and the spectrometer tagging performance
using diffractive events collected during 2006 and 2007 are discussed.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: We report evaluations of a resonant kinetic equation that suggest the slow
time evolution of the Garrett and Munk spectrum is {\em not}, in fact, slow.
Instead nonlinear transfers lead to evolution time scales that are smaller than
one wave period at high vertical wavenumber. Such values of the transfer rates
are inconsistent with conventional wisdom that regards the Garrett and Munk
spectrum as an approximate stationary state and puts the self-consistency of a
resonant kinetic equation at a serious risk. We explore possible reasons for
and resolutions of this paradox. Inclusion of near-resonant interactions
decreases the rate at which the spectrum evolves. This leads to improved
self-consistency of the kinetic equation.

Categories: physics.ao-ph
Abstract: Recent analyses indicate that the amount of atmospheric CO2 required to cause
dangerous climate change is at most 450 ppm, and likely less than that.
Reductions of non-CO2 climate forcings can provide only moderate, albeit
important, adjustments to the CO2 limit. Realization of how close the planet is
to "tipping points" with unacceptable consequences, especially ice sheet
disintegration with sea level rise out of humanity's control, has a bright
side. It implies an imperative: we must find a way to keep the CO2 amount so
low that it will also avert other detrimental effects that had begun to seem
inevitable, e.g., ocean acidification, loss of most alpine glaciers and thus
the water supply for millions of people, and shifting of climatic zones with
consequent extermination of species. Here I outline from a scientific
perspective actions needed to achieve low limits on CO2 and global warming.
These changes are technically feasible and have ancillary benefits. Achievement
of needed changes requires overcoming the spurious argument that developed and
developing countries have equivalent responsibilities, as well as overcoming
special interests advocating minimalist or counterproductive actions such as
corn-based ethanol and liquid-fuel-from-coal programs.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The properties of the known superconductors can be explained with the
correlations dominated superconducting mechanism (CSM). The correlations have
the spin correlation, the charge correlation and the spin-charge correlation,
and their strengths can be described by the related correlation lengths in
their correlation functions. Our evaluation from many superconductors is that
superconductivities occur if both the spin correlation and the charge
correlation are stronger, and the calculation of a Hubbard model showed that
the spin-charge correlation may govern superconductivities1. Afterwards, this
mechanism has led a model which includes various superconductivities and
magnetisms, and the relation between superconductivities and magnetisms can be
understood on this model2 (these results have been shown by calculations). This
mechanism is very practical, for example, to turn a material into a
superconductor or increase the Tc of a superconductor, what we will do is to
increase the spin-charge correlation. In this letter, we first describe the
relations between the spin-charge correlation, the spin correlation and the
charge correlation, take these relations as the basis of constructing a new
phase diagram, and then classify the known superconductors into various
sections in this phase diagram. This letter also gives a new explanation about
the pressure effect on Tc, the isotope effect on Tc and the pairing symmetry
with the CSM.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.CB
Abstract: Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are very selective filters that monitor the
transport between the cytoplasm and the nucleoplasm. Two models have been
suggested for the plug of the NPC. They are (i) it is a reversible hydrogel or
(ii) it is a polymer brush. We propose a mesoscopic model for the transport of
a protein through the plug, that is general enough to cover both. The protein
stretches the plug and creates a local deformation. The bubble so created
(prtoein+deformation) executes random walk in the plug. We find that for faster
relaxation of the gel, the diffusion of the bubble is greater. Further, on
using parameters appropriate for the brush, we find that the diffusion
coefficient is much lower. Hence the gel model seems to be more likely
explanation for the workings of the plug.

Categories: physics.acc-ph
Abstract: We propose a method for polarising antiprotons in a storage ring by means of
a polarised positron beam moving parallel to the antiprotons. If the relative
velocity is adjusted to $v/c \approx 0.002$ the cross section for spin-flip is
as large as about $2 \cdot 10^{13}$ barn as shown by new QED-calculations of
the triple spin-cross sections. Two possibilities for providing a positron
source with sufficient flux density are presented. A polarised positron beam
with a polarisation of 0.70 and a flux density of approximately $1.5 \cdot
10^{10}$/(mm$^2$ s) appears to be feasible by means of a radioactive $^{11}$C
dc-source. A more involved proposal is the production of polarised positrons by
pair production with circularly polarised photons. It yields a polarisation of
0.76 and requires the injection into a small storage ring. Such polariser
sources can be used at low (100 MeV) as well as at high (1 GeV) energy storage
rings providing a time of about one hour for polarisation build-up of about
$10^{10}$ antiprotons to a polarisation of about 0.18. A comparison with other
proposals show a gain in the figure-of-merit by a factor of about ten.

Categories: physics.soc-ph, cond-mat.dis-nn, cs.NI, physics.data-an
Abstract: Dynamical processes taking place on real networks define on them evolving
subnetworks whose topology is not necessarily the same of the underlying one.
We investigate the problem of determining the emerging degree distribution,
focusing on a class of tree-like processes, such as those used to explore the
Internet's topology. A general theory based on mean-field arguments is
proposed, both for single-source and multiple-source cases, and applied to the
specific example of the traceroute exploration of networks. Our results provide
a qualitative improvement in the understanding of dynamical sampling and of the
interplay between dynamics and topology in large networks like the Internet.

Categories: math.NA, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The scope of the present study is Eulerian modeling and simulation of
polydisperse liquid sprays undergoing droplet coalescence and evaporation. The
fundamental mathematical description is the Williams spray equation governing
the joint number density function f(v, u; x, t) of droplet volume and velocity.
Eulerian multi-fluid models have already been rigorously derived from this
equation in Laurent et al. (2004). The first key feature of the paper is the
application of direct quadrature method of moments (DQMOM) introduced by
Marchisio and Fox (2005) to the Williams spray equation. Both the multi-fluid
method and DQMOM yield systems of Eulerian conservation equations with
complicated interaction terms representing coalescence. In order to validate
and compare these approaches, the chosen configuration is a self-similar 2D
axisymmetrical decelerating nozzle with sprays having various size
distributions, ranging from smooth ones up to Dirac delta functions. The second
key feature of the paper is a thorough comparison of the two approaches for
various test-cases to a reference solution obtained through a classical
stochastic Lagrangian solver. Both Eulerian models prove to describe adequately
spray coalescence and yield a very interesting alternative to the Lagrangian
solver.

Categories: physics.class-ph, physics.geo-ph
Abstract: A method is proposed for accurately describing arbitrary-shaped free
boundaries in single-grid finite-difference schemes for elastodynamics, in a
time-domain velocity-stress framework. The basic idea is as follows: fictitious
values of the solution are built in vacuum, and injected into the numerical
integration scheme near boundaries. The most original feature of this method is
the way in which these fictitious values are calculated. They are based on
boundary conditions and compatibility conditions satisfied by the successive
spatial derivatives of the solution, up to a given order that depends on the
spatial accuracy of the integration scheme adopted. Since the work is mostly
done during the preprocessing step, the extra computational cost is negligible.
Stress-free conditions can be designed at any arbitrary order without any
numerical instability, as numerically checked. Using 10 grid nodes per minimal
S-wavelength with a propagation distance of 50 wavelengths yields highly
accurate results. With 5 grid nodes per minimal S-wavelength, the solution is
less accurate but still acceptable. A subcell resolution of the boundary inside
the Cartesian meshing is obtained, and the spurious diffractions induced by
staircase descriptions of boundaries are avoided. Contrary to what occurs with
the vacuum method, the quality of the numerical solution obtained with this
method is almost independent of the angle between the free boundary and the
Cartesian meshing.

Categories: q-fin.ST, physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: Based on criteria of mathematical simplicity and consistency with empirical
market data, a model with volatility driven by fractional noise has been
constructed which provides a fairly accurate mathematical parametrization of
the data. Here, some features of the model are discussed and, using agent-based
models, one tries to find which agent strategies and (or) properties of the
financial institutions might be responsible for the features of the fractional
volatility model.

Categories: physics.data-an, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We present a new benchmarking procedure that is unambiguous and specific to
local community-finding methods, allowing one to compare the accuracy of
various methods. We apply this to new and existing algorithms. A simple class
of synthetic benchmark networks is also developed, capable of testing
properties specific to these local methods.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Cell mechanical properties are fundamental to the organism but remain poorly
understood. We report a comprehensive phenomenological framework for the
nonlinear rheology of single fibroblast cells: a superposition of elastic
stiffening and viscoplastic kinematic hardening. Our results show, that in
spite of cell complexity its mechanical properties can be cast into simple,
well-defined rules, which provide mechanical cell strength and robustness via
control of crosslink slippage.

Categories: cond-mat.mtrl-sci, physics.class-ph
Abstract: We report tensile failure experiments on polyurethane (PU) foams. Experiments
have been performed by imposing a constant strain rate. We work on
heterogeneous materials for whom the failure does not occur suddenly and can
develop as a multistep process through a succession of microcracks that end at
pores. The acoustic energy and the waiting times between acoustic events follow
power-law distributions. This remains true while the foam density is varied.
However, experiments at low temperatures (PU foams more brittle) have not
yielded power-laws for the waiting times. The cumulative acoustic energy has no
power law divergence at the proximity of the failure point which is
qualitatively in agreement with other experiments done at imposed strain. We
notice a plateau in cumulative acoustic energy that seems to occur when a
single crack starts to propagate.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We reconsider some subtle points concerning the relativistic treatment of the
gravitational fields generated by spherically symmetric structures.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: For large enough aspect ratio, we find better stroke patterns then the
patterns proposed by D. Tam and A.P.Hosoi in their letter to PRL "Optimal
Stroke Patterns for Purcell's Three-Link Swimmer".

Categories: physics.gen-ph, physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: The balances of particles and charges in the volume of parallel-plane
ionization chamber are considered. Differential equations describing the
distribution of current densities in the chamber volume are obtained. As a
result of the differential equations solution an analytical form of the
current-voltage characteristic of parallel-plane ionization chamber with
inhomogeneous ionization in the volume is got.

Categories: physics.ins-det
Abstract: The CDF Central Preshower and Crack Detector Upgrade consist of scintillator
tiles with embedded wavelength-shifting fibers, clear-fiber optical cables, and
multi-anode photomultiplier readout. A description of the detector design, test
results from R&D studies, and construction phase are reported. The upgrade was
installed late in 2004, and a large amount of proton-antiproton collider data
has been collected since then. Detector studies using those data are also
discussed.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: In a quasiclassical framework, we formulate the quadruple ionization by
single photon absorption of the Coulomb five-body problem. We present the
quadruple photoionization total cross section of the ground state of Beryllium
for energies up to 620 eV. Our quasiclassical results for energies close to
threshold are in agreement with the Wannier threshold law for four electron
escape. In addition, the agreement of our results with a shape formula provides
support for the overall shape of our total quadruple cross section. Finally, we
find that the photon energy where the maximum of the total photoionization
cross section occurs for single, double, triple and quadruple photoionization
of H, He, Li and Be, respectively, seems to follow a linear relation with the
threshold energy for complete break-up of the respective element.

Categories: physics.chem-ph
Abstract: We report negative capacitance at low frequencies in organic semiconductor
based diodes and show that it appears only under bipolar injection conditions.
We account quantitatively for this phenomenon by the recombination current due
to electron-hole annihilation. Simple addition of the recombination current to
the well established model of space charge limited current in the presence of
traps, yields excellent fits to the experimentally measured admittance data.
The dependence of the extracted characteristic recombination time on the bias
voltage is indicative of a recombination process which is mediated by localized
traps.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.atom-ph, quant-ph
Abstract: We demonstrate slow and stored light in Rb vapor with a combination of
desirable features: minimal loss and distortion of the pulse shape, and large
fractional delay (> 10). This behavior is enabled by: (i) a group index that
can be controllably varied during light pulse propagation; and (ii)
controllable gain integrated into the medium to compensate for pulse loss. Any
medium with the above two characteristics should be able to realize similarly
high-performance slow light.

Categories: cond-mat.soft, cond-mat.stat-mech, physics.bio-ph, q-bio.BM
Abstract: We study the passage times of a translocating polymer of length $N$ in three
dimensions, while it is pulled through a narrow pore with a constant force $F$
applied to one end of the polymer. At small to moderate forces, satisfying the
condition $FN^{\nu}/k_BT\lesssim1$, where $\nu\approx0.588$ is the Flory
exponent for the polymer, we find that $\tau_N$, the mean time the polymer
takes to leave the pore, scales as $N^{2+\nu}$ independent of $F$, in agreement
with our earlier result for F=0. At strong forces, i.e., for
$FN^{\nu}/k_BT\gg1$, the behaviour of the passage time crosses over to
$\tau_N\sim N^2/F$. We show here that these behaviours stem from the polymer
dynamics at the immediate vicinity of the pore -- in particular, the memory
effects in the polymer chain tension imbalance across the pore.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: We derive general kinetic and hydrodynamic models of chemotactic aggregation
that describe certain features of the morphogenesis of biological colonies
(like bacteria, amoebae, endothelial cells or social insects). Starting from a
stochastic model defined in terms of N coupled Langevin equations, we derive a
nonlinear mean field Fokker-Planck equation governing the evolution of the
distribution function of the system in phase space. By taking the successive
moments of this kinetic equation and using a local thermodynamic equilibrium
condition, we derive a set of hydrodynamic equations involving a damping term.
In the limit of small frictions, we obtain a hyperbolic model describing the
formation of network patterns (filaments) and in the limit of strong frictions
we obtain a parabolic model which is a generalization of the standard
Keller-Segel model describing the formation of clusters (clumps). Our approach
connects and generalizes several models introduced in the chemotactic
literature. We discuss the analogy between bacterial colonies and
self-gravitating systems and between the chemotactic collapse and the
gravitational collapse (Jeans instability). We also show that the basic
equations of chemotaxis are similar to nonlinear mean field Fokker-Planck
equations so that a notion of effective generalized thermodynamics can be
developed.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: In this work we propose the use of a hirarchical extension of the
polygonality index as a means to characterize and model geographical networks:
each node is associated with the spatial position of the nodes, while the edges
of the network are defined by progressive connectivity adjacencies. Through the
analysis of such networks, while relating its topological and geometrical
properties, it is possible to obtain important indications about the
development dynamics of the networks under analysis. The potential of the
methodology is illustrated with respect to synthetic geographical networks.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: In our previous arXiv papers (more systematically the informational
conception is presented in the paper "The Information as Absolute", 2010) it
was rigorously shown that Matter in our Universe - and Universe as a whole -
are some informational systems (structures), which exist as uninterruptedly
transforming [practically] infinitesimal sub-sets in the absolutely infinite
and fundamental set "Information". Such a conception allows to suggest a
reasonable physical model that is based on the conjecture that Matter is some
analogue of computer (more correct - of a [huge] number of mutually
comparatively independent automata). The conjecture, in turn, allows
introducing in the model the basic logical elements that constitute the
material structures and support the informational exchange - i.e. the forces -
between the structures. The model yet now makes more clear a number of basic
problems in special relativity, quantum mechanics, and, rather probably, in
[now - in Newtonian] gravity. In this paper some possible experiments for the
model testing are considered.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: I review three socio-economic models of economic opinions, urban segregation,
and language change and show that the well known two-dimensional Ising model
gives about the same results in each case.

Categories: physics.hist-ph, gr-qc
Abstract: In the year 1957, when interest in Einstein's unified field theory was fading
away for lack of understanding of its physical content, Treder performed a
momentous critical analysis of the possible definitions of the electric
four-current in the theory. As an outcome of this scrutiny he was able to prove
by the E.I.H. method that properly defined point charges, appended at the
right-hand side of the field equation $R_{[[\mu\nu],\lambda]}=0$, interact
mutually with Coulomb-like forces, provided that a mutual force independent of
distance is present too. This unwanted, but unavoidable addition, could not but
lay further disbelief on the efforts initiated by Einstein and Schroedinger one
decade earlier. However in 1980 Treder himself recalled that the potential
$\phi=a/r+cr$, found by him in 1957, was the one used by particle physicists to
account phenomenologically for the spectrum of bound quark systems like mesons.
Exact solutions have later confirmed beyond any doubt that Einstein's unified
field theory does account in a simple way, already in classical form, for the
confinement of pole charges defined by the four-current first availed of by
Treder. In the present paper it is proposed, ad memoriam, a thorough
recollection of the article published by Treder in 1957, showing the way kept
by him to find what would have been later recognized as confinement in
Einstein's unified field theory.

Categories: physics.atom-ph
Abstract: The absolute frequencies of the hyperfine components of the R(26) 62-0
transition in molecular iodine at 501.7 nm are measured for the first time with
an optical clockwork based on a femtosecond laser frequency comb generator. The
set-up is composed of an Ar+ laser locked to a hyperfine component of the R(26)
62-0 transition detected in a continuously pumped low-pressure cell (0.33 Pa).
The detected resonances show a linewidth of 45 kHz (half-width at
half-maximum). The uncertainty of the frequency measurement is estimated to be
250 Hz.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: We perform a detailed analysis of the contact force network in a dense
confined packing of pentagonal particles simulated by means of the contact
dynamics method. The effect of particle shape is evidenced by comparing the
data from pentagon packing and from a packing with identical characteristics
except for the circular shape of the particles. A counterintuitive finding of
this work is that, under steady shearing, the pentagon packing develops a lower
structural anisotropy than the disk packing. We show that this weakness is
compensated by a higher force anisotropy, leading to enhanced shear strength of
the pentagon packing. We revisit "strong" and "weak" force networks in the
pentagon packing, but our simulation data provide also evidence for a large
class of "very weak" forces carried mainly by vertex-to-edge contacts. The
strong force chains are mostly composed of edge-to-edge contacts with a marked
zig-zag aspect and a decreasing exponential probability distribution as in a
disk packing.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn
Abstract: A fluorescent image analysis procedure to determine the distribution of
species concentration and density in a gas flow is proposed. The fluorescent
emission is due to the excitation of atoms/molecules of a gas that is
intercepted by an electron blade. The intensity of the fluorescent light is
proportional to the local number density of the gas. When the gas flow is a
mixture of different species, this proportionality can be exploited to extract
the contribution associated to the species from the spectral superposition
acquired by a digital camera. This yields a method that simultaneously reveals
species concentrations and mass density of the mixture. The procedure is
applied to two under-expanded sonic jets discharged into a different gas
ambient - Helium into Argon and Argon into Helium - to measure the
concentration and density distribution along the jet axis and across it. A
comparison with experimental and numerical results obtained by other authors
when observing under-expanded jets at different Mach numbers is made with the
density distribution along the axis of the jet. This density distribution
appears to be self-similar.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The mathematical properties associated with the widely accepted concept of
the extensivity of many of the common thermodynamic variables are examined and
some of their consequences considered. The possible conflict between some of
these and currently accepted results of special relativistic thermodynamics is
highlighted. Although several questions are raised, answers are not advanced as
this seems an area demanding calm, widespread reflection which could
conceivably lead to radical revision of part, or parts, of theoretical physics.

Categories: cond-mat.stat-mech, astro-ph, nucl-th, physics.data-an
Abstract: We present a molecular dynamics test of the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) in a
paradigmatic long-range-interacting many-body classical Hamiltonian system, the
HMF model. We calculate sums of velocities at equidistant times along
deterministic trajectories for different sizes and energy densities. We show
that, when the system is in a chaotic regime (specifically, at thermal
equilibrium), ergodicity is essentially verified, and the Pdfs of the sums
appear to be Gaussians, consistently with the standard CLT. When the system is,
instead, only weakly chaotic (specifically, along longstanding metastable
Quasi-Stationary States), nonergodicity (i.e., discrepant ensemble and time
averages) is observed, and robust $q$-Gaussian attractors emerge, consistently
with recently proved generalizations of the CLT.

Categories: physics.atom-ph, physics.atm-clus
Abstract: We demonstrate rather interesting manifestations of co-existence of resonance
features in characteristics of the photoionization of 3d-electrons in Xe, Cs
and Ba endohedral atoms. It is shown that for all of the considered atoms the
reflection by the fullerene shell of photoelectrons produced by the 3d subshell
photoionization affects greatly partial photoionization cross-sections of 3d5/2
and 3d3/2 levels and respective angular anisotropy parameters, both dipole and
non-dipole adding to all of them additional maximums and minimums. The results
obtained demonstrate distinctive differences between the three atoms.
  The calculations are performed treating the 3/2 and 5/2 electrons as
electrons of different kinds with their spins "up" and "down". The effect of
C60 shell is accounted for in the frame of the "orange" skin potential model.
It is essential that in the considered photon frequency region presented
resonance features are not affected by the C60 polarization.

Categories: physics.soc-ph
Abstract: We introduce a statistical physics model for opinion dynamics on random
networks where agents adopt the opinion held by the majority of their direct
neighbors only if the fraction of these neighbors exceeds a certain threshold,
p_u. We find a transition from total final consensus to a mixed phase where
opinions coexist amongst the agents. The relevant parameters are the relative
sizes in the initial opinion distribution within the population and the
connectivity of the underlying network. As the order parameter we define the
asymptotic state of opinions. In the phase diagram we find regions of total
consensus and a mixed phase. As the 'laggard parameter' p_u increases the
regions of consensus shrink. In addition we introduce rewiring of the
underlying network during the opinion formation process and discuss the
resulting consequences in the phase diagram.

Categories: quant-ph, physics.atom-ph, physics.chem-ph
Abstract: A coherent superposition of rotational states in D$_2$ has been excited by
nonresonant ultrafast (12 femtosecond) intense (2 $\times$ 10$^{14}$
Wcm$^{-2}$) 800 nm laser pulses leading to impulsive dynamic alignment.
Field-free evolution of this rotational wavepacket has been mapped to high
temporal resolution by a time-delayed pulse, initiating rapid double
ionization, which is highly sensitive to the angle of orientation of the
molecular axis with respect to the polarization direction, $\theta$. The
detailed fractional revivals of the neutral D$_2$ wavepacket as a function of
$\theta$ and evolution time have been observed and modelled theoretically.

Categories: cond-mat.other, nucl-th, physics.atom-ph
Abstract: We apply the configuration-interaction method to calculate the spectra of
two-component Fermi systems in a harmonic trap, studying the convergence of the
method at the unitary interaction limit. We find that for a fixed
regularization of the two-body interaction the convergence is exponential or
better in the truncation parameter of the many-body space. However, the
conventional regularization is found to have poor convergence in the
regularization parameter, with an error that scales as a low negative power of
this parameter. We propose a new regularization of the two-body interaction
that produces exponential convergence for systems of three and four particles.
  From the systematics, we estimate the ground-state energy of the
four-particle system to be (5.05 +- 0.024)hbar omega.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: In recent years, advances in computational power and spatial data analysis
(GIS, remote sensing, etc) have led to an increase in attempts to model the
spread and behaviour of wildland fires across the landscape. This series of
review papers endeavours to critically and comprehensively review all types of
surface fire spread models developed since 1990. This paper reviews models of
an empirical or quasi-empirical nature. These models are based solely on the
statistical analysis of experimentally obtained data with or without some
physical framework for the basis of the relations. Other papers in the series
review models of a physical or quasi-physical nature, and mathematical
analogues and simulation models. The main relations of empirical models are
that of wind speed and fuel moisture content with rate of forward spread.
Comparisons are made of the different functional relationships selected by
various authors for these variables.

Categories: physics.geo-ph, physics.ao-ph
Abstract: In recent years, advances in computational power and spatial data analysis
(GIS, remote sensing, etc) have led to an increase in attempts to model the
spread and behvaiour of wildland fires across the landscape. This series of
review papers endeavours to critically and comprehensively review all types of
surface fire spread models developed since 1990. This paper reviews models of a
simulation or mathematical analogue nature. Most simulation models are
implementations of existing empirical or quasi-empirical models and their
primary function is to convert these generally one dimensional models to two
dimensions and then propagate a fire perimeter across a modelled landscape.
Mathematical analogue models are those that are based on some mathematical
conceit (rather than a physical representation of fire spread) that
coincidentally simulates the spread of fire. Other papers in the series review
models of an physical or quasi-physical nature and empirical or quasi-empirical
nature. Many models are extensions or refinements of models developed before
1990. Where this is the case, these models are also discussed but much less
comprehensively.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: We show that one of exact solutions of the second-order Dirac-Coulomb
equation were pseudo. In the corresponding original literature, it was
considered that the mass of the electron with a Coulomb potential was
position-dependent, but the obtained eigenvalues set was not the inevitable
mathematical deduction of the given second-order Dirac equation, and the
second-order Dirac equations were not the inevitable mathematical deduction of
the given couplet first-order Dirac equation with the position-dependent mass
of the electron. In the present paper, we obtain the correct solution of the
introduced first-order differential equations. This new solution would be
tenable only when the wave equation is correct, but there is not any experiment
date to validate the so-called position-dependent of the electron in the
Coulomb field.

Categories: physics.gen-ph
Abstract: The orthodox interpretation of quantum theory treats the subject and the
object on an equal footing. It has been suggested that the cyclical-time
process, which resolves self-reference in consciousness, interconnects the
observed universe and the mind of the subject. Based on the analogy between
cryptography and language, the concept of the common innate structure of
language, also known as universal grammar, may be associated with the
continuity in consciousness. Extending this connection, Levi-Strauss's proposal
on universal culture may be considered as a shared structure of continuity
among the consciousness of multiple subjects.

Categories: physics.flu-dyn, math-ph, math.AP, math.MP, nlin.SI
Abstract: Using certain finite-dimensional stable range of the nonlinear terms, we
obtain large families of exact solutions parameterized by functions for the
equation of nonstationary transonic gas flows discovered by Lin, Reisner and
Tsien, and its three-dimensional generalization.

Categories: physics.chem-ph, physics.atm-clus, physics.comp-ph
Abstract: The high-accuracy W4 computational thermochemistry protocol, and several
post-W4 methods, have been applied to the P$_2$ and P$_4$ molecules. Contrary
to previous studies, we find the experimental thermochemistry to be
fundamentally sound. The reaction enthalpy for P$_4\to 2$P$_2$ has a very
significant contribution from post-CCSD(T) correlation effects. We derive a
gas-phase heat of formation for the phosphorus atom of $\Delta
H^\circ_{f,0}$[P(g)]=75.54$\pm$0.1 kcal/mol and $\Delta
H^\circ_{f,298}$[P(g)]=75.74$\pm$0.1 kcal/mol, in the upper half of the CODATA
uncertainty interval.

Categories: physics.plasm-ph
Abstract: We present an analysis of radiation induced instabilities in an expanding
plasma with considerable presence of dust particles and equilibrium cooling. We
have shown that the equilibrium expansion and cooling destabilize the radiation
condensation modes and the presence of dust particles enhances this effect. We
have examined our results in the context of ionized, dusty-plasma environments
such as those found in planetary nebulae (PNe). We show that due to the
non-static equilibrium and finite equilibrium cooling, small-scale localized
structures formed out of thermal instability, become transient, which agrees
with the observational results. The dust-charge fluctuation is found to heavily
suppress these instabilities, though in view of non-availability of convincing
experimental data, a definitive conclusion could not be made.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: Piezooptic coefficients of Sn2P2S6 crystals are experimentally determined for
l=623.8 nm and T=293 K with the aid of interferometric technique. The
components of the elastic stiffness tensor for these crystals are calculated on
the basis of studies for the acoustic wave velocities. It is shown that
acoustooptic figure of merit can achieve extremely high values for Sn2P2S6
crystals (M2 - 2x10-12s3/kg2).

Categories: physics.optics, physics.gen-ph
Abstract: This paper has mainly a pedagogical meaning. Our aim is to demonstrate a
correct general approach for constructing indicative surfaces of higher-rank
tensors. We reconstruct the surfaces of piezo-optic tensor for beta-BaB2O4 and
LiNbO3 crystals, which have been incorrectly presented in our recent papers.

Categories: physics.class-ph
Abstract: Previous studies have shown that the elastic properties of Zinc
Dialkyl-dithiophosphate (ZDTP) tribofilms measured by nanoindentation increase
versus applied pressure (Anvil effect) [1, 2]. The aim of this paper is to
demonstrate that, up to 8 GPa, this increase is a reversible phenomenon. A ZDTP
tribofilm has been produced on "AISI 52100" steel substrate using a
Cameron-Plint tribometer. After its formation, a hydrostatic pressure of about
8 GPa was applied during one minute on the tribofilm using a large radius steel
ball ("Brinell-like" test). Nanoindentation tests were performed with a
Berkovich tip on pads in order to measure and compare the mechanical properties
of the tribofilm inside and outside the macroscopic plastically deformed area.
Careful AFM observations have been carried out on each indent in order to take
into account actual contact area. No difference in elastic properties was
observed between the two areas: tribofilm modulus and pressure sensitivity are
the same inside and outside the residual hemispherical print. This demonstrates
that Anvil effect is a reversible phenomenon in the studied pressure range.

Categories: physics.bio-ph, q-bio.PE
Abstract: We solve the Unanimity Rule on networks with exponential, uniform and
scalefree degree distributions. In particular we arrive at equations relating
the asymptotic number of nodes in one of two states to the initial fraction of
nodes in this state. The solutions for exponential and uniform networks are
exact, the approximation for the scalefree case is in perfect agreement with
simulation results. We use these solutions to provide a theoretical
understanding for experimental data on biodiversity loss in foodwebs, which is
available for the three network types discussed. The model allows in principle
to estimate the critical value of species that have to be removed from the
system to induce its complete collapse.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: Surface waves, named here as Dyakonov-Tamm waves, can exist at the planar
interface of an isotropic dielectric material and a chiral sculptured thin film
(STF). Due to the periodic nonhomogeneity of a chiral STF, the range of the
refractive index of the isotropic material is smaller but the range of the
propagation direction in the interface plane is much larger, in comparison to
those for the existence of Dyakonov waves at the planar interface of an
isotropic dielectric material and a columnar thin film.

Categories: physics.bio-ph
Abstract: Icosahedral shells undergo a buckling transition as the ratio of Young's
modulus to bending stiffness increases. Strong bending stiffness favors smooth,
nearly spherical shapes, while weak bending stiffness leads to a sharply
faceted icosahedral shape. Based on the phonon spectrum of a simplified
mass-and-spring model of the shell, we interpret the transition from smooth to
faceted as a soft-mode transition. In contrast to the case of a disclinated
planar network where the transition is sharply defined, the mean curvature of
the sphere smooths the transitition. We define elastic susceptibilities as the
response to forces applied at vertices, edges and faces of an icosahedron. At
the soft-mode transition the vertex susceptibility is the largest, but as the
shell becomes more faceted the edge and face susceptibilities greatly exceed
the vertex susceptibility. Limiting behaviors of the susceptibilities are
analyzed and related to the ridge-scaling behavior of elastic sheets. Our
results apply to virus capsids, liposomes with crystalline order and other
shell-like structures with icosahedral symmetry.

Categories: astro-ph, physics.ao-ph, physics.geo-ph, physics.soc-ph
Abstract: It has been claimed by others that observed temporal correlations of
terrestrial cloud cover with `the cosmic ray intensity' are causal. The
possibility arises, therefore, of a connection between cosmic rays and Global
Warming. If true, the implications would be very great. We have examined this
claim to look for evidence to corroborate it. So far we have not found any and
so our tentative conclusions are to doubt it. Such correlations as appear are
more likely to be due to the small variations in solar irradiance, which, of
course, correlate with cosmic rays. We estimate that less than 15% of the
11-year cycle warming variations are due to cosmic rays and less than 2% of the
warming over the last 35 years is due to this cause.

Categories: physics.optics, physics.class-ph
Abstract: The selection of a higher vapor deposition angle when growing a columnar thin
film (CTF) leads to surface-wave propagation at a planar metal-CTF interface
with phase velocity of lower magnitude and shorter propagation range.
Acordingly, a higher angle of plane-wave incidence is required to excite that
surface wave in a modified Kretschmann configuration.