Which factor will most likely cause a person to develop a fever?a leg muscle relaxing after exercisea bacterial population in the bloodstreamseveral viral particles on the skincarbohydrates being digested in the stomach
Lichens are symbiotic organisms made of green algae and fungi. What do the green algae supply to the fungi in this symbiotic relationship?carbon dioxidefoodprotectionwater
When a switch is used in an electrical circuit, the switch cancause the charge to build.increase and decrease the voltage.cause the current to change direction.stop and start the flow of current.
Which of the following is an example of an assistive device?contact lensmotorcycleraincoatcoffee pot
Rocks are classified as igneous, metamorphic, or sedimentary according totheir colortheir shapehow they formedthe minerals they contain
A chewable calcium carbonate tablet is a common treatment for stomach discomfort. Calcium carbonate is most likely used as this type of medicine because calcium carbonatehas a pleasant flavor.is inexpensive to produce.neutralizes digestive acid.occurs naturally in the body.
Which two body systems are directly involved in movement?muscular and skeletaldigestive and muscularskeletal and respiratoryrespiratory and digestive
Which change in the state of water particles causes the particles to become arranged in a fixed position?boilingmeltingfreezingevaporating
Earth's core is primarily composed of which of the following materials?basaltironmagmaquartz
Which of the following events during meiosis contributes most to the variation within a species?pairing of chromosomescreation of haploid gametessegregation of allelesseparation of chromatids
Which of the following was probably most important in the formation of dark, fertile soil that is good for farming?plant decompositionradioactive decaywater erosionwind erosion
When igneous rock is changed into metamorphic rock, which form of energy is this process?heatchemicalmagneticlight
In humans, the digestion process begins inthe intestine, with squeezing.the mouth, with chewing and saliva.the stomach, with churning and acid.the esophagus, with pushing towards the stomach.
Which of these items contains only a solution?a jar of picklesa bottle of juicea bag of peanutsa can of mixed fruit
Many natural rock formations change color over time. In Utah, for example, iron oxidized and formed red, orange, and yellow rock. Which of the following is the cause of this change?chemical weatheringmechanical weatheringwater erosionwind erosion
A population of small, plant-eating beetles lives in a forest. About half of the beetles are light brown and the others are dark green. If years of drought cause the area to become dry with few trees, what would the beetle population most likely look like after several generations?It would be mostly light brown beetles.It would be mostly dark green beetles.It would be mostly carnivorous beetles.It would be mostly very large beetles.
A scientist wanting to document a change in a river's flow pattern should observe a river over a period ofdays.weeks.months.years.
Automobile engines built today are designed to be gas efficient. Gas-efficient engines most likely affect a city by reducingair pollution.heat pollution.noise pollution.light pollution.
A student in an empty classroom shouts, "Hello!" Which best explains what the student hears after the shout?an increased loudness of sounda reflection of soundan increased frequency of sounda refraction of sound
Which type of energy in gasoline is transformed into mechanical energy in a motorcycle engine?chemicalnuclearmagneticelectrical
A student standing near a campfire feels warmer as the fire grows. Which process most likely transfers heat from the campfire to the student?conductionconvectionradiationtransformation
In snapdragon plants, red flowers are dominant to white flowers. When red-flowered plants are crossed with white-flowered plants, pink flowers are produced. If a researcher wants to produce plants with only white flowers, what color should the parent plants be?both redboth whiteone red and one whiteone white and one pink
Scientists use the term "light year" to describehow fast light travels in space.the distance light travels in one year.how large the diameters of different stars are.the time it takes the Sun to move through the galaxy.
Plate movement can form different features on Earth. The movement of tectonic plates can be both a constructive and a destructive force. At which type of plate boundary is new crust formed?convergentsubductiontransformdivergent
Which group of organisms can show significant trait changes in the shortest period of time?bacteriabirdsfishreptiles
Peach trees have sweet-smelling blossoms and produce rich fruit. What is the main purpose of the flowers of a peach tree?to attract bees for pollinationto create flower arrangementsto protect the tree from diseaseto feed migratory birds
A group of students are researching changes in climate in their region. Which of these would best provide evidence of changes in temperature and rainfall over a period of years?tree ringspollen samplesharvest productioncarbon dating
Which of these would help to prevent infections from occurring in small cuts and scrapes?apply a cold ice packraise the injured areaapply pressure to stop bleedingwash the area with warm, soapy water
Which best describes why winds at the beach change direction between day and night?because the temperatures over land and over water changebecause warm air over land sinks and stays in place over landbecause cool air rises and is replaced by warm air from the oceanbecause cool air sinks and stays in place over land
Soil erosion can be best prevented byremoving grass from the steepest slope.building terraces into the sides of a slope.heavily watering the vegetation on the slope.increasing the slope of the land by adding more soil.
Which of the following properties provides the BEST way to identify a mineral?hardnessshapesizetemperature
Which sequence represents the order of development for many plants?seed develops inside fruit -> seed is dispersed -> seed germinates -> plant growsseed is dispersed -> seed develops inside fruit -> seed germinates -> plant growsseed germinates -> plant grows -> seed is dispersed -> seed develops inside fruitseed is dispersed -> plant grows -> seed germinates -> seed develops inside fruit
When ice cream is left out of a freezer, the ice cream changes from a ___.solid to a gasgas to a liquidsolid to a liquidliquid to a gas
Which equipment will best separate a mixture of iron filings and black pepper?magnetfilter papertriple-beam balancevoltmeter
Which characteristic is shared by all cells?They need energy.They reproduce sexually.They make their own food.They move from place to place.
On a small, isolated island, a hurricane destroyed all the trees that produced a large, hard-shelled nut. Which bird population would most likely decrease?birds with long, probing beaksbirds with thick, strong beaksbirds with thin, short beaksbirds with large, pouch beaks
A cow and a frog have similar bone structures in their forelimbs. Both have phalanges, radius, ulna, and humerus bones. However, the cow and frog are animals with very different life cycles from each other. Which most likely describes why the body structures of these animals are so similar?Both have undergone similar mutations.Both descended from a common ancestor.Both reacted similarly to environmental pressures.Both spread out from the same geographical region.
A cell that is unable to import substances required to process chemical energy is most likely a result of a malfunctioningcell membrane.endoplasmic reticulum.Golgi body.nuclear envelope.
Which best describes all unicellular organisms?Every cell is round.Every cell can make food.Every cell can move on its own.Every cell performs all life functions.
When a transverse wave passes from right to left through a medium, what happens to the particles of the medium?Particles travel from right to left along the wave.Particles travel from left to right along the wave.Particles move back and forth parallel to the wave.Particles move back and forth perpendicular to the wave.
Which characteristic below most likely accounts for our limited knowledge of galaxies?their tiny sizetheir magnetic corestheir inability to produce lighttheir great distance from Earth
Decomposers increase the fertility of the soil and prevent dead organisms from building up in the environment. In which way do decomposers make the soil more fertile?by adding carbonby adding nitrogenby removing excess waterby removing excess minerals
When oxygen combines with hydrogen, which substance is formed?watervinegarhydrochloric acidhydrogen dioxide
When plants undergo photosynthesis, a reaction produces sugar, oxygen, and water. During respiration, stored energy from the products of photosynthesis is converted to usable energy. In what form is the energy stored prior to use in respiration?chemical energykinetic energylight energyheat energy
Which of the following is a typical example of a unicellular organism?earthwormbacteriafungigreen algae
Over geologic time, global mean sea level has varied significantly. Which change is most likely responsible for an increase in global mean sea level?erosion of sediment from a mountain rangemass extinction of marine organismsformation of an ocean trenchmelting of polar ice caps
Which body system is most responsible for the removal of waste?skeletal systemnervous systemmuscular systemexcretory system
In which environment is white fur color an advantage for survival?desertgrasslandarctic tundratemperate forest
Which of these will best separate iron filings from sand?watera magnifying glassa magnetrubbing alcohol
Which of these is the chemical symbol for magnesium?MaMgMnMu
Which of the following is most likely to lead to error in an experiment?biasrepeated trialspeer reviewuse of a control
Which best describes transportation technology?a system that is used to move people and productsan enterprise that changes raw materials into goodsthe building and finishing of structuresthe conversion of mechanical energy into heat energy
In a gasoline-powered car, chemical energy from gasoline is transformed to make the car move. The motion of the car is what form of energy?radiant energynuclear energyelectrical energymechanical energy
Which characteristic is affected by interactions with the environment?weighteye colorblood typehandedness
Which is the greatest impact humans have had on the carbon cycle?clear-cutting forestsmanufacturing plasticsburning fossil fuelsgrowing agricultural crops
The floating arrow on a compass always points towards thewest.east.south.north.
Which color shirt will reflect the most light on a hot, sunny day?blackblueredwhite
A 10 g sample of aluminum and a 10 g sample of iron were each heated by 100 joules of energy. The temperature of the aluminum sample rose 11°C, while the temperature of the iron sample increased 23°C. Which statement best accounts for these results?Iron is twice as dense as aluminum.Atoms of aluminum are smaller than atoms of iron.Using equal masses results in similar heat capacities.The specific heat of iron is less than that of aluminum.
If its food supply in a field decreases, the mouse population in that field will probablyincrease.decrease.remain the same.become extinct.
Overuse of soil for farming causes local disruptions of several Earth subsystems. Which of these is a part of the biogeochemical cycle that experiences the most severe local disruption?release of carbon into the atmosphererelease of oxygen into the atmospherecycling phosphorus into the soilcycling hydrogen into the soil
Which of the following is an example of a physical change but not a chemical change?A log gives off heat and light as it burns.A tree stores energy from the Sun in its fruit.A penny lost in the grass slowly changes color.A water pipe freezes and cracks on a cold night.
While conducting an investigation on refraction, a teacher uses a red laser pointer to show how a beam of light is affected as it passes through several glass objects. The teacher should make sure that theroom is totally dark.light source is ultraviolet.beam of light does not travel toward the students.room walls are shielded with insulating material.
One student wrote a report about an investigation in which fertilizer was added to tomato plants. Which information from that student's report would most help a second student repeat the investigation?the amount of fertilizer addedthe height of the fertilized plantsthe size of each tomato producedthe number of tomatoes produced
A student wants to look under a heavy rock. Which simple machine would be BEST to use to lift the rock?Wheel and axleLeverInclined planeScrew
Rust is a compound with the formula Fe_{2}O_{3}. Which elements combine to form rust?iron and wateriron and oxygeniron and airiron and acid
The chemical equation below shows a reaction of copper (Cu) with silver nitrate (AgNO_{3}) yielding silver (Ag) and copper(II) nitrate (Cu(NO_{3})_{2}) Cu + 2AgNO_{3} -> 2Ag + Cu(NO_{3})_{2} Silver and copper(II) nitrate are called thereactants.products.catalysts.inhibitors.
What role does the centromere play in cellular reproduction?It is the area where microtubules are formed.It is the area where the nucleus is during cell division.It is the area of alignment for the chromosomes.It is the area of attachment for chromatids.
If 1 kg of the compound toluene melts at -95°C, then 500 g of toluene willmelt at -47.5°C.melt at -95°C.boil at 95°C.boil at 47.5°C.
A calculation based on the chemical energy of gasoline shows that a car should be able to go 100 miles on a gallon of fuel. When the car was driven on a test track, the car only went 25 miles on a gallon of fuel. What accounts for most of the difference?the mass of the driver and the fuel carried by the carthe wind resistance between the car and the air nearbythe waste heat from the combustion of fuel in the enginethe friction between the tires and the surface of the track
A student wants to find the relationship between the diameter of several plastic disks and the circumference of each disk. Which of these types of graphs should be constructed to determine this relationship?pie graphline graphscatterplotbox-and-whisker plot
When light is bounced off a mirror, the light isreflected.refracted.absorbed.diffracted.
Which of the following sentences best explains what happens when puddles evaporate?The water absorbs into the ground.The particles of matter move more slowly.The water changes from one form to another.The particles of matter move closer together.
Plants on hills keep dirt in place during a rain storm. Plant roots grow into the dirt and keep the dirt from moving. Why do roots grow into the dirt?to release gasesto release waterto absorb energyto absorb nutrients
In animal skin tissue, cell division is responsible forgrowth and repairsexual reproductionobtaining energyproduction of sex cells
Which process drives most of the ATP synthesis in a chloroplast?flow of protons across an electrochemical gradientflow of tRNA across an electrochemical gradientexposure of ADP to electromagnetic wavesexposure of carbohydrates to electromagnetic waves
Which of the following is most consistent with the modern theory of evolution?Parents pass their physical traits to their offspring; those offspring with traits that help them survive in the environment are able to reproduce.Parents change their physical traits in order to survive in the environment, then those parental traits are passed to their offspring.Life on this planet came from another planet far out in space.Living organisms have not changed for hundreds of millions of years.
Felicia investigated whether water color affected how fast the water heated in sunlight. She poured tap water into five beakers and placed food coloring in four out of the five beakers. Felicia then used a thermometer to measure the temperature of the water in each of the beakers. Which of these was used as control in her investigation?mixing the food coloring in watertesting the beaker of uncolored tap waterusing the same amount of water in each trialtesting the colored water samples at different times
One process in the formation of sedimentary rocks is when rocks arecompressed by moving plates.heated and subjected to high pressure.broken up and deposited in layers.moved up along fault planes.
Western coral snakes have a striped color pattern and are poisonous. Arizona mountain king snakes look like western coral snakes but are not poisonous. The color pattern of the Arizona mountain king snake is an example ofcamouflage.mimicry.mutualism.parasitism.
Which plant trait is inherited?the shape of its leavesthe amount of water it receivesthe number of minerals it absorbs from soilthe level of sunlight to which it is exposed
A student put 200 milliliters (mL) of water into a pot, sets the pot on a burner, and heats the water to boil. When the pot is taken off the burner, it contains only 180 milliliters (mL) of water. What happened to the rest of the water?It was used up.It condensed.It was absorbed by the heat.It turned into water vapor.
Howie put his plants under a plant light. What was he helping his plants do by providing light?make foodattract insectsrelease pollengrow roots
Which lists the diameter of the planets in order from smallest to largest?Venus, Earth, Mercury, MarsEarth, Mars, Venus, MercuryMars, Mercury, Earth, VenusMercury, Mars, Venus, Earth
The aloe plant can absorb a lot of water during a rain shower. The extra water is stored in its leaves. The ability to store water in its leaves is most likely an adaptation to which type of environment?one near the oceanone with dry conditionsone with a variety of organismsone that receives a lot of sunlight
When stratospheric ozone levels are reduced, the amount of ultraviolet radiation hitting Earth increases. Ozone depletion is most often causedby the reversal of the magnetic field of Earth.when fluorocarbons are released into the atmosphere.when electromagnetic waves from the Sun increase.by abrupt changes in weather and climate patterns.
Owen tested a physical property of a mineral. He rubbed a mineral sample on a piece of white tile. The mineral left a red mark on the tile. Which of the following physical properties of the mineral was Owen most likely testing?cleavagehardnesslusterstreak
Which of these animals has a young form that looks the most like the adult form?mothhumanfrogbutterfly
Two tectonic plates pushing toward each other cause intense heat and pressure in Earth's crust. Into which will crust material be changed by heat and pressure?fossilssedimentsigneous rockmetamorphic rock
A student states that plants grow taller when grown in natural light than they do in artificial light. Which method is the best way to determine if the statement is fact or opinion?conduct a controlled experimentdiscuss the statement with other studentsask several teachers their thoughtspropose a scientific conclusion
Which object is powered by an electrical circuit?a druma flashlighta matchsticka wind-up toy
Which concept supports the endosymbiotic origin of complex, eukaryotic double-membrane structures?Mitochondria and chloroplasts arise from preexisting mitochondria and chloroplasts.Mitochondria and chloroplasts arise from preexisting endomembrane systems.Mitochondria and chloroplasts are synthesized in the nucleus.Mitochondria and chloroplasts are synthesized in ribosomes.
Which of these human activities most relies on high-quality soil?HikingHuntingCoal miningGrowing crops
What is an example of a shelter in an ecosystem?a gray squirrel eating an acorna raccoon in a hollow loga blue whale migratinga tick feeding on a coyote
Some areas of the world are experiencing more desert-like conditions. This change most favors survival of species with the ability to do which of the following?consume large amounts of foodbecome dormant for long periodssense infrared and ultraviolet lighttranspire water through the skin to the atmosphere
Roger poured water over a pile of sand. Some of the sand washed away. This process is similar to which of the following?The eruption of a volcanoThe erosion of the walls of a canyonThe uplifting of mountain rangesThe forming of dunes or mounds in a desert
When an earthquake wave passes from the crust to the mantle, the wavereverses direction.changes speed.increases energy.stops moving.
A student wraps a wire around an iron nail. The student then connects the wire to a battery. The nail attracts another nail and they stick together. What force holds the two nails together?gravitational forcemagnetic forceelectric forcefriction force
Natural processes cause rapid and slow changes to Earth's surface. Which event causes changes to Earth's surface most rapidly?an earthquake shaking the groundsediment washing into a baya rainstorm weathering rockwater flowing in stream
Since 1961, Nevada has led the United States in production of which resource?golduraniumlumberiron
A class is testing the effect of exercise on heart rate. The heart rate of two students before exercise is compared to their heart rate after running around a track. Which procedure will most likely help the class correctly compare the results of the two students?test students who are the same heighthave the students run on the same daymeasure the distance each student runshave the students run for the same amount of time
Which interaction within an ecosystem is characterized by gradual change from one community of organisms to another?symbiosisfood websenergy pyramidssuccession
The continuous changes of a seed to an adult plant that produces seeds is known as alunar cycle.weekly cycle.daily cycle.life cycle.
When someone plays the flute, sound is produced because the air in the flute ishot.neutral.vibrating.vaporizing.
Scientists compared Pluto with other objects in the solar system and found that Pluto is smaller than Earth's moon. This finding caused scientists to question whether Pluto is a planet becausePluto gets less sunlight than Earth's moonthe other planets are much larger than Plutothe other planets have moons and Pluto does notPluto rotates on its axis and the other planets do not
When an iron nail wrapped in a copper wire is attached to a circuit, it formsa battery.an engine.an insulator.an electromagnet.
Which gas accounts for the largest percentage of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere?carbon monoxidecarbon dioxidenitrous oxidewater vapor
Which human body system attacks viruses and bacteria once they have invaded the body?circulatoryendocrinedigestiveimmune
The atoms that make up oxygen gasshare two covalent bonds.have a definite shape.share a pair of neutrons.have two free electrons.
A student wants to cut a piece of string for a class activity. The length of the string is measured BEST in which units?GallonsLitersMilesCentimeters
If the atomic mass number of an atom is 35, which statement is most accurate?The atom is not an isotope.The atomic number is less than 17.The atom has an odd number of neutrons.The number of protons does not equal the number of neutrons.
Biotic components need to be recycled through an ecosystem. Which type of organisms are best able to recycle nutrients back into the ecosystem?decomposerspredatorsproducersscavengers
Roger visited his grandfather who lives on a farm. While he was there, he helped his grandfather move hay out of the barn. As Roger worked in the barn he began sneezing. Which system of the body most likely caused Roger to sneeze?circulatoryexcretorydigestiveimmune
Why should plants be included in investigations about the water cycle?Plants speed up the water cycle by removing carbon from the air.Plants start the water cycle when they make water in photosynthesis.Plants are part of the water cycle through the process of transpiration.Plants stop the water cycle because they absorb it and stop the flow to streams.
Which statement best identifies a basic need of all animals?They need to eat.They need to hide.They need to jump.They need to smell.
Which of the following describes an instinctive behavior?a behavior that occurs only in adult fisha behavior that occurs only in small mammalsa behavior that an animal learns how to do over timea behavior that an animal is born knowing how to do
Which of these provide the best evidence that life could develop on Mars?its atmospheric gasesits surface temperaturesits craters and rocky surfaceits ice and organic molecules
The primary reason that plants are important for an ecosystem is because theyprovide energy for consumers.depend on other organisms for shelter.break down dead animal matter.consume nutrients for energy.
Energy from the Sun reaches Earth byradiation.conduction.convection.thermal expansion.
Scientists study the current conditions of many solar system objects to gain insight into conditions early in the history of Earth. Which phenomenon most closely models current theories of early Earth?liquid forming valleys on Marshundreds of active volcanoes on Iorock and ice forming the core of Neptuneice covering the entire surface of Europa
Jonathan places a pot of water on a stove. As the water boils, how does the state of the water change?from gas to liquidfrom liquid to gasfrom liquid to solidfrom solid to liquid
Animal cells obtain energy byprocessing sunlight.absorbing nutrients.growing.dividing.
Which illness is associated with a weakened immune system in the body?tetanuscancermeaslesrabies
In the human kidney, urea from the blood is filtered through the glomerular membrane into a nephron. The movement of urea across this membrane occurs without an input of energy. Which factor is the most likely reason urea absorption does not require energy?a pH imbalancea pressure differencea temperature increasea concentration gradient
The greatest amount of diversity can be found among which type of organism?plantsanimalsbacteriafungi
Which energy type is common enough in Nevada to make a significant contribution to the renewable energy needs of the state?coalgeothermalnatural gaspetroleum
Until recently the Grand Canyon was thought to be about 5-6 million years old. Recently a scientist gathered data and wrote a paper for a scientific journal that indicated the canyon is about 17 million years old. Before this new information about the canyon is accepted, which of these needs to occur?The scientist needs to publish additional papers.The scientist needs to obtain government support.Other scientists need to state their beliefs.Many scientists need to evaluate the data.
Which human trait is most likely inherited from a parent?learning to ride a bikeholding a spoonreading a bookheight
Foam weather stripping is often placed in the frames of doors and windows in a home. What is the purpose of this weather stripping?The weather stripping increases heat transfer by radiation.Heat is conducted quickly through the weather stripping.The weather stripping reduces heat loss due to convection.Heat can transfer through the weather stripping due to reflection.
The items listed below were found in a science classroom. * a heart made of plastic with many of its parts labeled * clay formed to look like Earth and other planets * a giant plastic plant cell with removable cell parts These items are all examples ofmodelsexperimentsvariablescontrols
For a technology project, Kyle came up with an idea to build a model bridge. He wants his bridge to span 50 cm and to support a 1 kg object. According to the engineering design process, which of the following should be Kyle's next step?construct prototypes of different kinds of bridgesresearch the different designs of bridgesgather the materials needed to build the bridgemake a drawing to show how to build the bridge
Light travels fastest through which of the following?airglasswatera vacuum
Different systems of the human body perform different functions. Which system takes oxygen from the air to be moved by the circulatory system?the respiratory systemthe digestive systemthe nervous systemthe skeletal system
A solar cell turns sunlight into another form of energy. A solar cell is most like what natural structure?an elephant's earsa plant's leavesa deer's hoovesa tree's roots
The Sun appears to move across the sky each day, rising in the east and setting in the west. What causes this apparent motion?the rotation of Earth on its axisthe revolution of the Sun around Earththe Earth’s distance from the Sunthe properties of Earth’s atmosphere
What causes a blue block to appear blue in the sunlight?The block absorbs all blue light.The block bends (refracts) all blue light.Only blue light is reflected by the block.Only blue light passes through the block.
A student determined the density of different bars of soap. Which should the student most likely do to check the accuracy of the results?complete the experiment in one daytest multiple brands of soaprecord data in metric unitsrepeat the experiment
Which method below would be the best way to determine if an egg, plastic foam, a piece of wood, or a candle would float on water?observing each object in watermeasuring the size of each objectcalculating the weight of the objectscomparing the shapes of the objects
Liam lives in the Northern Hemisphere of Earth and plays in the snow in December. His friend lives in the Southern Hemisphere of Earth and plays at the beach in December. What is the best explanation for why this is possible?tilt of Earth on its axisrotation of Earth on its axisrevolution of Earth around the Sunrevolution of the Moon around Earth
A scientist needs to take a picture of the well-ordered arrangements of the atoms and molecules within a substance. Which of the following instruments would be best for the scientist to use?a laser light with holograph.a seismograph.an electron microscope.a stereoscope.
Gold atoms can be identified based on the number of which subatomic particles?neutronselectronsnucleiprotons
Which is needed for both boiling and melting to occur?solidsgasesheatpressure
Which of the following is an example of genetic engineering?Growing a whole plant from a single cell.Finding the sequences of bases in plant DNA.Inserting a gene into plants that makes them resistant to insects.Attaching the root of one type of plant to the stem of another type of plant.
Which of the following is an example of a container that is filled with a pure substance rather than with a mixture?a tire filled with aira jar filled with salt watera balloon filled with heliuma glass filled with chocolate milk
Which best describes the role of the esophagus in digestion?It releases acid and mixes food.It aids in absorption of nutrients from food.It carries food from the mouth to the stomach.It carries food from the stomach to the intestines.
Which change is most likely caused by a thunderstorm?a glacier movinga stream floodinga volcano eruptinga mountain forming
Which is an example of an organism that has been selectively bred for a particular genetic trait?cats that eat micecows that graze on grasspigs that form large herdschickens that lay large eggs
Which of these can be described as a system of stars, gases, dust, and other matter that orbits a common center of gravity?an asteroida galaxya nebulaa comet
The Florida Bog Frog (Lithobates okaloosae) inhabits shallow stream overflows in three counties in Florida. With such a small geographic habitat, any change in the frog's environment could cause drastic changes in the population. Which would most likely affect the frog population if acid rain changed the pH of the water?Prey insects would become inedible.Tadpoles would be unable to survive.Breeding sites would become unavailable.Predators would choose another food source.
Which function do kidneys provide to maintain homeostasis?the removal of excess heat from the bodythe removal of carbon dioxide from the bodythe removal of excess oxygen from the bloodthe removal of nitrogenous wastes from the blood
While running, leg muscles work to move leg bones, and the skin helps toregulate body temperature.sense small changes in the heart rate.transport nutrients to muscles.maintain oxygen levels in the blood.
Rolanda is growing tomato plants in her garden. She has created a compost pile and has been adding compost around her tomato plants to help fertilize them. Compost is solid waste in which organic material is broken down by microorganisms in the presence of oxygen to where it can be safely stored, handled, and applied to the environment. On what does Rolanda primarily rely in order for composting to work?producersconsumersscavengersdecomposers
Some students were on a tour exploring the inside of a cave. While the students were in the cave, they realized they heard an echo every time that they spoke. Which most likely caused the echo to occur?the accumulation of the sound wavesthe diffraction of the sound wavesthe refraction of the sound wavesthe reflection of the sound waves
A scientist uses angstrom units to measure the distance between two points. The scientist is most likely measuring the distance between twoatoms.cities.continents.stars.
Based on the evidence available at the time, early models of the solar system stated that all objects in space orbited Earth. In the 16th century, an astronomer reevaluated the evidence and proposed a model of the solar system that is still in use. What part of this model corrected the mistake in previous solar system models?The Sun is at the center of this model.Earth is the largest object in this model.This model contains more than one star.This model shows that Earth is stationary.
The hormone insulin is secreted by the pancreas. Which activity is most likely to trigger an increase in the levels of insulin circulating in the blood?drivingeatingjoggingsleeping
In gym class a student kicks a soccer ball high into the air. As the ball goes upward, which type of energy is increasing?kinetic energythermal energypotential energymechanical energy
Which best describes the orbit of the Moon around Earth?circular with a period of about one monthcircular with a period of about one weekelliptical with a period of about one monthelliptical with a period of about one week
In any physical or chemical process, what two quantities are always conserved?matter and total energylight and acoustic energydensity and thermal energygravity and potential energy
The nucleus of MOST atoms consists ofneutrons onlyprotons and neutronsprotons and electronsneutrons and electrons
The complete removal of decomposers from an ecosystem will have the greatest effect on which of the following?the spread of diseasethe availability of waterthe recycling of nutrientsthe distribution of organisms
In an accurate diagram of the solar system, which object would be shown closest to Earth?the Moonthe asteroid beltMarsSaturn
Typically, sedimentary rocks are formedonly in erupting volcanoes.only under great pressure and high temperatures.below Earth's surface as magma cools and crystallizes.from materials that settle.
Which renewable resource is used with photovoltaic cells to produce electricity?hydrothermal energysolar energygeothermal energynuclear energy
Which will most likely happen to a solid substance that is heated?It will melt.It will boil.It will harden.It will evaporate.
A scientist observes an unusual activity while studying bacterial cells. Using scientific inquiry to investigate the activity will enable the scientist tocontrol the behavior.prove that the behavior is beneficial.evaluate different explanations of the behavior.conclude how the behavior will change in the future.
In order to survive, all organisms must havechlorophyllcarbon dioxideenergyblood
Which observation of a plant supports the inference that photosynthesis can take place?a strong, sweet smella dry, rough texturea green colora smooth stem
To safely conduct an experiment using chemicals, what should students always do?Work in large groups.Wear safety goggles.Wear short sleeves.Keep a window open.
Infections may be caused bymutationsmicroorganismstoxic substancesclimate changes
Which are two parts of the carbon cycle?freezing and thawinggrowth and reproductionevaporation and precipitationphotosynthesis and respiration
The digestive system breaks food into simple substances that the body can use. What system carries these simple substances from the digestive system to other parts of the body?circulatorynervousrespiratoryskeletal
A student conducts an experiment using a common but potentially harmful bacteria culture. After working with the bacteria, which is the most important safety practice to follow?turn off any electrical equipmentdispose of waste materialswash hands and tabletops thoroughlyreturn materials to their proper place
Which of these environmental changes goes on for months or years?droughtfloodavalanchelandslide
Erin placed her shamrock plant in a dark corner. Soon she saw that the leaves had tilted toward her window. What did the plant need most from the window?sunlight during the dayair during the daydarkness at nightwarmth at night
Which gravitational pull has the greatest influence on Earth's tides?the gravitational pull between Earth and the Moonthe gravitational pull between Earth and the Sunthe gravitational pull between Earth and Jupiterthe gravitational pull between Earth and Mars
One key physical process in beach formation is wave action. Sand is deposited on beaches as waves break onto the shoreline and the energy from the wave scatters. Which type of energy is most used by wave action to modify the shape of the beaches?thermalpotentialchemicalmechanical
A student is asked to bring something that feels rough to class. Which would be BEST for him to bring?PillowMarbleSandpaperTrading card
What tool would be used to examine a fingerprint?a graduated cylindera hand lensa pair of gogglesa thermometer
Which of the following is a mineral?diamondplasticsteelwood
During a rainstorm, leaves wash down a gully on a hillside. The water slows down at the foot of the hill and fans out, depositing the leaves. What geologic structure is formed in a similar way?a basalt columna stalactitea fault linea delta
The change in fur color of the Arctic hare from brown in the summer to white in the winter is an example ofmimicry.heredity.diversity.camouflage.
Which sense is used to tell if there is sugar in a glass of tea?TouchHearingSmellTaste
The surface of Earth is covered by a relatively thin layer of water called thecrustmantlehydrosphereatmosphere
All organisms contain DNA and RNA. What are the subunits of DNA and RNA?simple sugarsamino acidscarbohydratesnucleotides
How does ice change the shape of rocks?It dissolves the rocks by pooling on surfaces.It breaks the rocks by expanding in openings.It smooths the rocks by colliding with them.It moves the rocks by pressing on them.
Which property of Earth's interior keeps the innermost part in a solid state?relatively low temperatureextremely high pressurehigh rate of heat flowlow rate of radioactive decay
Diseases that can be transmitted between organisms areinfectious.inherited.environmental.congenital.
The transfer of thermal energy from one object to another is known asheat.electricity.magnetism.temperature.
Which part of the body carries out the function of copying DNA?brainheartbonescells
The atomic mass of an atom isthe same as the atomic number.the same as the group number.the sum of protons and neutrons.the difference between protons and electrons.
Different species of carnivorous animals that share the same habitat in an ecosystem maybecome decomposerscompete for foodproduce their own foodmate with each other
Which scientist is best known for studying plants and animals?Isaac NewtonAlbert EinsteinCharles DarwinNicolaus Copernicus
Green plants get the energy they need to make food fromairsunlightwatersoil
The movement of soil by wind or water is calledcondensationevaporationerosionfriction
Arctic areas are covered with snow and ice for much of the year. Which color rabbits would be safest from foxes there?greyblackwhitebrown
The ratio of an object's mass to its volume is itsarea.perimeter.density.weight.
As the hawk population increases in an ecosystem, the deer mouse population will most likely decrease as a result ofdecrease in food source.increase in disease.increase in predators.decrease in habitat.
Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere trap heat near Earth's surface. Which of these is a greenhouse gas?nitrogenargonwater vaporoxygen
What happens during photosynthesis?Insects pollinate plants.Plants change soil into food energy.Animals get carbon dioxide from plants.Plants change light energy into food energy.
Which is an example of a chemical reaction?The melting of iceThe grinding of salt crystals to powderThe burning of woodThe evaporation of water from a puddle
A baby kit fox grows to become an adult with a mass of over 3.5 kg. What factor will have the greatest influence on this kit fox's survival?the size of the fox's earsthe conditions of the fox's habitatthe average number of fox offspringthe social behaviors within the fox population
Hydrochloric acid is added to a beaker containing a piece of zinc. As a result, zinc chloride is formed and hydrogen gas is released. This is an example ofa chemical reactiona physical changephotosynthesisevaporation
Which part of a plant produces the seeds?flowerleavesstemroots
Which of the following is found in all living organisms?cellorganorgan systemtissue
What is the role of decomposers in a food chain?They consume other organisms.They break down dead organic matter.They use the Sun's energy to make food.They convert inorganic matter into organic matter.
Copernicus changed the way people viewed the solar system byclaiming Earth is in orbit about the Sun.inventing, then improving, the telescope.writing the theory of the infinite universe.showing planetary orbits are elliptical.
Which part of the electromagnetic spectrum can humans sense without using equipment or technology?radio wavesvisible lightmicrowavesX-rays
The nervous system is composed of cells, tissues, and organs. Which is a cell of the nervous system?brainspinal cordganglionneuron
A shallow container of salt water is placed in sunlight for a day. Which is the most likely result?All of the mixture will evaporate.The salt will keep the water from evaporating.The salt will separate from the water and float at the top of the container.Only the water will evaporate and the salt will remain in the container.
Which of these will best separate a saltwater solution?using a paper filtering systemusing chromatographyallowing the salt to settleallowing the water to evaporate
Mrs. Henderson's class has five small, covered boxes. One contains perfume; another contains dried onions. There is also a box of pine needles, a box of lemon pieces, and a box with a paper towel wet with vanilla flavoring. Which should they do to get the best information about what is in each box?Shake the boxes.Smell the boxes.Listen to the boxes.Weigh the boxes.
Which features are physical properties of an iron nail?conducts heat, magnetic, solidconducts electricity, magnetic, rustsconducts sound, insulates, non-magneticdissolves, conducts heat, non-magnetic
Which item would a magnet attract?iron nailwool clothwooden stickglass marble
Which human activity is most harmful to the natural environment?swimming in a lakeriding a bicyclecutting down a rain forestusing solar energy
The process of digestion breaks down proteins into smaller molecules that are used to rebuild other proteins. During digestion, proteins undergocell division.nuclear reactions.natural selection.chemical changes.
Blood is composed of different cell types that transport nutrients and wastes throughout the body. Because of this, blood is classified asa tissue.an organ.a system.an organism.
What should a student do when a glass beaker shatters during a laboratory experiment?Notify the teacher.Sweep the pieces into a pile.Pick up the pieces and throw them away.Leave it until the experiment is complete.
An astronomical unit (AU) refers to the distance betweenEarth and the Sun.the Moon and the Sun.Earth and the Moon.the Sun and the nearest star.
An organ pipe produces a musical note same number of nitrogen gas molecules. with a wavelength of 2.72 m. What is the frequency of this note if the speed of sound is 348 m/s?85.7 Hz128 Hz260 Hz466 Hz
Which of the following allows the planets to stay in orbit?the Moon's gravitythe Sun's gravitymagnetismrotation
Which of these involves the formation of a new chemical substance?evaporation of gasolinemixing salt and pepperdissolving sugar in tearusting of an iron chain
Water causes weathering when itmelts rock.forms deltas.erodes rock in its path.moves rock along a fault.
Which of these statements about nonrenewable resources is true?They are inexpensive.They help keep the air clean.They can take millions of years to form.They are used because they are easily removed from the ground.
Which statement best identifies a living thing that depends on another living thing to survive?A wolf drinks water.A moose eats a plant.A spruce tree grows in soil.A salmonberry plant absorbs sunlight.
A student is playing with a small toy boat on a pond. The student throws a rock in the pond. This creates waves that move the boat toward the shore. The boat moves toward the shore because the waves transferenergy.heat.motion.water.
A geologist finds a layer of shale near the surface from a certain time period. Nearby, the geologist finds the same layer of shale, but it is deeper underground than the first layer. What might have caused the difference in the depth of the shale layer?a meteoritea faultancient fossilsanimal life
The pull of gravity on Earth is caused byair pressure.the mass of Earth.volcanoes erupting.Earth's orbit around the Sun.
In which type of rock are fossils generally found?igneousmetamorphicsedimentaryvolcanic
Structural geologists study rock formations to determine the type of environment in which the rocks formed and the events that shaped the rocks. Paleontologists study fossils found in rock formations. Scientists in both these fields have a common interest in discovering thehistory and processes of Earth.elements that make up the crust.types of minerals that make up sediments.relationships between Earth and other planets.
A simple machine that helps move a flag up a flagpole isa bar magnetan inclined planea pulleya lever
Which cellular structure allows nutrients to pass into cells?mitochondrionnucleusmembranechloroplast
An example of a renewable resource isoil.coal.wood.natural gas.
Minerals are formed by which process?magma coolingfault lines movingmetamorphosissedimentation
Which of these best defines the term "pollutant"?anything humans add to the atmosphere and oceansany substance that is harmful to the environmentany substance that is a waste product of industrya substance that does not break down over time
The periodic table of the elements is systematically organized according to therate at which the elements chemically react.hardness of the elements.structure of the atoms of the elements.radioactivity of the atoms of the elements.
Which human body system produces the hormones that regulate growth?skeletaldigestivecirculatoryendocrine
Repeated exposure to extremely loud sounds can reduce hearing ability by direct damage to which structures?the sensory neurons in the earsinterneurons between the ears and the brainthe sound-processing center in the brainmotor neurons applying commands from the brain to the ears
What does a mirror do to light that causes objects to appear backwards?refractsreflectsabsorbsblocks
The formation of the mineral halite is most likely to occur by which process?the evaporation of seawaterthe hardening of lava in seawaterthe cementing together of sediment particlesthe slow crystallization of magma deep in the crust
A student wants to design an experiment regarding the behavior of crickets. Which is the best question to ask to begin the experiment?Do crickets have 6 legs or 8 legs?How long are the antennae of a cricket?Do crickets chirp more during the day or at night?What is the most common cricket species?
Decomposers are organisms that eat and break down dead plant and animal material. Which organism is a decomposer?algaemossbacteriafish
An area received six inches of snow during the winter. Before the snow can continue through the water cycle as ground water or runoff, it must first ___.condenseevaporatefreezemelt
New vaccines for diseases are being developed all the time. How do vaccines most likely help people?Vaccines help prevent illnesses.Vaccines keep the environment cleaner.Vaccines help cure people who are sick.Vaccines kill bacteria that cause infections.
The cell cycle describes the processes that take place as a cellabsorbs nutrients.makes proteins.repairs old cells.forms new cells.
A company that makes fences started using a new material instead of wood. The new material will last longer than wood. What is the most likely benefit of the new material?The new material will keep people safe.The new material will keep pets contained.The new material can make a yard attractive.The new material can save money on replacements.
Which best explains how the Appalachian Mountains formed?an ancient river floodedan earthquake folded landtectonic plates pulled aparttectonic plates collided
Which is a source of sound?thermal energypotential energya vibrationa medium
Which natural material is best for making a table?cotton that is lightweightleather that can twistpaper that can tearwood that is sturdy
A class is studying textures and collects several samples. Which of these items would the students most likely use magnification to study?haircheeseplastic spoonaluminum foil
Over several years, a scientist successfully isolates a species of flower for white color. This year, when the new generation of flowers blooms, one yellow flower is found in the population. Which is the best reason for the appearance of a new flower color within the species?adaptationreplicationgenetic mutationhomologous recombination
What type of precipitation occurs when raindrops freeze as they fall?hailfrostsleetsnow
In the atomic model that includes a nucleus, the positive charge isspread evenly throughout the model.located at multiple sites in the model.concentrated in the center of the model.positioned outside the center of the model.
A student used two long wires to connect a lightbulb to a battery. The student noticed that as soon as the circuit was complete, a nearby compass started to point in a direction other than north. The compass pointed in a different direction because it was reacting to theheat produced by the lightbulb.light produced by the lightbulb.electric field produced by the battery.magnetic field produced by the electric current.
The production of sweat is typically a response to an increase in the body'sblood circulation.temperature.respiration.heart rate.
Which of the following converts electrical energy into motion?light switchelectric stovelight bulbelectric fan
What happens at the boiling point of a substance?liquid becomes a gassolid becomes a gasliquid becomes a solidsolid becomes a liquid
How do producers get energy?eating plants and seedseating other animalsbreaking down organisms through decayusing the sun to make food
In an investigation, a student wants to see how a ball is affected by rolling it over a surface covered with sandpaper. In preparation for the trial, the student makes a list of the possible conditions that could affect the investigation. The student is most likely listing theconstants.variables.controls.trials.
If two organisms are classified in different orders but are in the same class, which of these statements is true?The organisms have the same genus.The organisms are in the same phylum.The organisms are in different kingdoms.The organisms are members of the same species.
Why do mountain climbers at high elevations use oxygen tanks to help them breathe?At high elevations the ozone layer draws oxygen out of the atmosphere.The atmosphere is less dense at higher elevations so there is less oxygen available.Oxygen is heavier than the other gases in the atmosphere and sinks to lower elevations.Radiation from the Sun splits oxygen molecules into atoms making the oxygen unbreathable.
The students were told that the net applied force from the engine was the same for each vehicle tested. Based on this information, which vehicle had the greatest acceleration (a = F/m)?vehicle 1vehicle 2vehicle 3vehicle 4
Which metric unit is used to describe an object's length?gram (g)milliliter (mL)centimeter (cm)degree Celsius (°C)
Which is a process that occurs during photosynthesis?Plants take in oxygen and release sugar.Plants take in sugar and release minerals.Plants take in minerals and release carbon dioxide.Plants take in carbon dioxide and release oxygen.
The work of which scientist serves as the basis for many procedures used in agriculture, such as selective breeding of plants?DarwinMendelEinsteinPasteur
A student is investigating which type of soil is best for growing tomato plants from seeds. The student plants four tomato seeds in each of three different containers of soil. Which step of the procedure would help the student get the most reliable results?Place one container in a dark room.Use different types of tomato seeds.Change only the soil type in each container.Water each container with a different amount of water.
In many caves, rock formations include stalactites and stalagmites. Where does the rock in these formations come from?magmarainwaterdissolved mineralsdecaying organic matter
A person named Leonardo da Vinci studied many things including animals, geology, clouds, and flight. His study of birds helped him design the first parachute. Everything he saw made him ask how and why. Which human quality most likely made this person want to study many different things?dutywisdomkindnesscuriosity
What is the main reason we can see the Moon?The Moon reflects light from the Earth.The Moon reflects the light from the Sun.The Moon produces its own light.The Moon is larger than stars.
Which of these events have the most influence on regional climate?frequent tornadoesocean trade windswinter snowstormstemperature inversions
If a scientist wants the medical community to revise old information and use new research findings in the treatment of a disease, it would be best to present the informationat a school science fair.in a newspaper article.at a physicians' conference.in a television commercial.
David planted ten corn seeds in sandy soil and ten corn seeds in clay soil. He kept both groups of plants at room temperature, gave them the same amount of water, and placed them all in the same sunny room. Which of the following questions is David most able to answer with his experiment?How much soil and water do corn seeds need to grow?Do corn plants grow better in sandy soil or in clay soil?Do corn plants grown in sandy soil need more water than corn plants grown in clay soil?What are the effects of soil, temperature, water, and sunshine on the growth of corn plants?
Which geologic feature most likely forms when an oceanic tectonic plate is slowly subducted beneath a continental tectonic plate?ocean trenchmid-ocean ridgecontinental hot spotcontinental rift valley
A glacier retreats leaving bare rocks. Lichens begin to live on the rocks. The lichens produce an acid that starts to break down the rocks. How will this process affect the environment?It will put acid into the lakes and ponds.It will begin the process of building soil.It will prevent the carbon cycle from occurring.It will prevent bacteria from invading the ecosystem.
During protein synthesis, mRNA is translated into three-base sequences representing amino acids. What signals the ribosome to begin translating the mRNA into a new amino acid sequence?a codonenzymesa mutationtemperature
Phobos is one of two large objects that orbit the planet Mars. Because Phobos orbits Mars, Phobos should be classified as which type of body?asteroidmooncometmeteor
Water at 20°C in an uncovered pan is evaporating very slowly. What could be done to the water to make it evaporate more quickly?Cover it.Heat it.Place it in the dark.Put salt in it.
Which rapid changes are caused by heat from inside Earth?landslidesvolcanoesavalanchesfloods
Which tool is most responsible for preventing future pandemics of smallpox?worldwide vaccination for smallpoxglobal education about smallpoxbetter worldwide urban sanitationimproved global quarantine facilities
After which event will ecological succession most likely happen?a forest firea thunderstorma high tidea lunar eclipse
Sir Isaac Newton determined that white light is made up of all the colors of the rainbow. What did he use to discover this phenomenon?a prisma telescopea microscopea magnifying glass
Which characteristic is most common among animals living in a cold climate?layers of fatthick bonesslow digestionlarge lungs
Species are classified based on their characteristics. Which characteristic identifies two organisms as members of one species? The organismscan produce fertile offspring.can communicate easily.will defend their territory.will move from place to place.
A student hypothesizes that the amount of water a plant receives will affect how long it grows before reaching maturity. To test this hypothesis, the student will needseveral digital scales.a wet paper towel.several identical plant seeds.different sizes of containers.
One example of matter issoundlightheatwater
If a classroom experiment involves the use of several unidentified chemical solutions, which factor would be most important in maintaining safety during the experiment?The classroom would be fairly cold.The classroom would have poor lighting.The classroom would have good ventilation.The classroom would have carpet on the floors.
Vein deposits of gold and silver are often formed in areas that have experienced which geologic process?igneous intrusiontransport by waterchemical weatheringcompaction by pressure
Cells that conduct messages are known asskin cellsnerve cellsblood cellskidney cells
The boiling of water results in a physical change in matter fromsolid to liquid.gas to solid.solid to gas.liquid to gas.
What do playing a guitar, banging a drum, and dropping a pebble in the water have in common?They all produce light.They all cause vibrations.They all convert heat to energy.They all need gravity to move.
Which object below is gaining stored energy?A rubber band that is being stretchedA battery in a flashlight that is onA candle that is burning
At room temperature, what state of matter is copper?gassolidliquidplasma
All of the following events occur during prophase in mitosis exceptpairing of chromosomes.spindle formation.crossing over.condensation of DNA.
A seed of a plant sticks to the fur of an animal as it walks by. How has the animal most likely helped the plant?by spreading the seedby sprouting the plantby scattering the pollenby fertilizing the ground
Which part of a plant is used to absorb sunlight during photosynthesis?leafrootseedflower
You wish to closely observe a small insect. Which tool is the best to use?a balancea test tubea telescopea magnifying glass
The interaction of the skeletal and muscular systems to produce locomotion is coordinated by which human body system?circulatoryexcretorynervousrespiratory
A student flips a coin four times. It lands "heads" up three times. The student concludes that the coin will land "heads" up three times out of four. What will make the conclusion more accurate?substituting a different coinflipping the coin twenty more timestaping a weight to one side of the coinflipping the coin over a smoother surface
Which mineral has six-sided transparent crystals that will scratch glass?sulfurquartzcalcitefeldspar
Which best describes a proton?negatively charged and has a negligible massnegatively charged and part of the nucleuspositively charged and part of the nucleusnegatively charged and orbits the nucleus
The difference between the atomic number of an element and the element's atomic mass is the number ofions.protons.electrons.neutrons.
Which step will most likely ensure that the results of an investigation are valid?using a computer to graph resultsverifying that results match the original hypothesiscomparing the results with those of other scientistseliminating any results that appear to be abnormal
What is formed when a sodium atom and chlorine atom react chemically?an elementa compoundan electrona neutron
Which of these is an example of an endothermic process?fireworks displayglowing light stickfirst-aid instant cold packgasoline-burning car engine
The distance from Earth to the Sun is about 150,000,000 km. What abbreviation do scientists use to describe this distance?meters per second (m/s)light-year (ly)astronomical unit (AU)electromagnetic unit (EMU)
In New York State, the longest period of daylight occurs during which month?JuneMarchDecemberSeptember
Which trait does a puppy inherit from its parents?fur color and patternobedience to commandsfood brand preferencesaffection for a specific home
Which material is most easily recycled at school?plastic wrapnotebook paperice cream sticksrubber erasers
Plants make sugars in the presence of sunlight in a process called photosynthesis. What form of carbon do the plants take in for this process?glucose moleculecarbon dioxidesingle carbon atomscomplex organic compounds
The sun is a star of average size and brightness. From Earth, the sun appears as a round, yellow object in the daytime sky. At night, we see other stars. They appear as tiny points of light. Why does the sun appear larger than stars that we see at night?Daylight brightens the sun, making it appear larger.Starlight bends as it passes planets, making the stars appear smaller.The sun is closer to Earth than other stars, making the sun appear larger.Earth's atmosphere filters out light from other stars, making them appear smaller.
A drain cleaner consists of sodium hydroxide and aluminum. When the drain cleaner is added to water, bubbles of hydrogen are produced, and the solution becomes very hot. Which of these best describes what happens to form the bubbles when the cleaner is added to water? Fchemical reactionCondensationA physical changeEvaporation
John has diabetes. Which of the following should he be careful about eating or drinking?beefeggsmilkfruit juice
Within a substance, atoms that collide frequently and move independently of one another are most likely in aliquid.solid.gas.crystal.
Which object best reflects light?gray doorwhite floorblack sweaterbrown carpet
The gravitational attraction of the Moon causes which effect on Earth?ocean tidestime of dayenergy from the Sunphases of the Moon
A forest was cleared for the building of a resort, but before construction began, secondary succession set in. Which of these describes why secondary succession appeared so rapidly?The clearing allowed mosses to grow quickly.Rock weathering occurred for lichens to grow.Exposed substrates allowed microbes to grow.The soil components remained for plants to grow.
Which object is made to reflect light?telescopewindowmirroreyeglasses
A car may produce many forms of energy from the fuel it uses. Which indicates that a car does not use fuel with 100% efficiency?The car changes speed.The car engine gets hot.The car stops quickly.The car slides on slippery streets.
After nitrogen becomes part of the lithosphere, what is the next change that nitrogen will undergo?used as a nutrient by plantsfixed by bacteria in the soilconverted into oxygenabsorbed into the atmosphere by lightning
Which of the following would be more likely to pollute a river?allowing beavers to build a damspreading fertilizer near the rivermowing the grass on the river bankfishing from a bridge over the river
For two organisms to be classified as the same species, they must produce offspring that arefertile.adaptable.alive at birth.identical to the parents.
Which sentence best describes the organization of the heart?The heart is an organ made up of different types of tissues, each of which has different types of cells.The heart is a tissue made up of different types of organs, each of which has different types of cells.The heart is a system made up of one type of tissue and identical cells.The heart is a tissue made up of one type of organ and identical cells.
Which stage in the reptile life cycle is most like the birth of a lion cub?hatching from an eggshedding the skinhunting for foodfinding a mate
What would be the best way to determine the role of squirrels in a forest ecosystem?measure the length and mass of several squirrelsdetermine the genes that control squirrel traitsmake field observations of squirrels in their natural habitatread articles about the energy and nutrient requirements of squirrels
Which of the following systems breaks food into nutrients that can be used by the body?circulatorydigestiverespiratoryreproductive
Barry collected four different rocks. The rock with the GREATEST mass will feel the ___.heaviestsmoothestsharpesthardest
Which of the following is not an inherited trait of humans?eye colorhair colorfavorite foodheight
When a person chews, saliva from the mouth mixes with starches in food. These starches begin to turn into sugars. Changing starches into sugars is best described asa phase change.a cellular change.a physical change.a chemical change.
Which of these renewable resources results in an increase in pollution when used to produce energy?waterwindbiomassgeothermal
Granite is an igneous rock. Which of these describes what usually happens to granite after it is weathered, broken into small particles, buried deep underground, and compacted?The granite becomes a new rock type.The granite forms an active volcano.The granite becomes part of a deep fault.The granite forms a tall mountain.
The features below are all present on Earth. Which feature could also be found on the Moon?cratercloudselectrical stormsnitrogen based atmosphere
What is the highest temperature that water can reach in a pot on a stove?50°C90°C100°C212°C
In 2004 the Hubble space telescope captured images of distant star clusters, each containing about a million stars. These star clusters were most likely part of which structure?a black holea galaxya nebulaa solar system
Where is most of the mass of the atom located?in the protonsin the nucleusin the neutronsin the electrons
Which situation is the best example of ecological succession?An organism survives a difficult winter.The populations in an area remain the same.One species replaces another species in an ecosystem.Each of several species uses the same amount of resources.
The BEST way to tell the DIFFERENCE between an oak and a maple tree is to compare theheight of both trees.number of leaves on the trees.size of the root systems of the trees.shape of the leaves.
Which example describes a learned behavior in a dog?smelling the air for odorsbarking when disturbedsitting on commanddigging in soil
In a lab investigation, a student notes that two metal blocks have the same mass. Based on this observation, if the two blocks were put on opposite sides of a balance, they would best representbalanced forces.unbalanced forces.equal and opposite reactions.objects in motion.
A scientist was investigating why several fish caught from a local stream displayed similar mutations. He found that the water temperature of the stream was elevated since an industrial plant began discharging heated water into the stream. The scientist concluded that increased water temperature during the egg phase led to the mutation in the fish. According to this conclusion, the mutation was caused byan autoimmune disorder.a congenital defect.an environmental condition.an injury from a predator.
Solar radiation has a part in the water cycle byaffecting ocean tides.helping in the absorption of groundwater.determining the type of clouds formed.changing water to a vapor.
A student sets a block at the top of a wooden ramp. The student pushes the block. As the block slides down the ramp, it slows down and then comes to a stop. What force causes the block to slow down?the force of gravitythe force of frictionthe force of magnetismthe force of the student's push
Which of these explains how a trench can form?two oceanic plates convergingtwo continental plates convergingtwo continental plates divergingtwo oceanic plates diverging
Pepsin is an enzyme that acts in the stomach for protein digestion. Which of these is most likely the main role of pepsin in this metabolic reaction?to speed up the rate of reactionto reduce the loss of energy as heatto control the direction of the reactionto protect the reaction from other chemicals
Sodium chloride, commonly called "table salt," is made up of sodium and chlorine that have been combined chemically. Which term best describes sodium chloride?AcidAtomElementCompound
Katia was listening to music on the radio. In order for the sound to be produced, the electrical energy must be converted into which type of energy?thermal energymagnetic energychemical energymechanical energy
Studies of snail fossils in Egypt indicate that areas of Egypt that are now desert were once thriving savannahs approximately 130,000 years ago. What does the presence of these fossils indicate about the area of Egypt that was thriving 130,000 years ago?There was more humidity in the air.There were fewer nutrients in the soil.There was more snowfall in the region.There was less solar radiation in the region.
Which statement identifies an energy source as renewable?Oil, because it is found underground.Wind, because it is always available.Water, because it is becoming scarce.Coal, because it was formed from plants.
A wet towel will dry when it is left in the Sun. Which process occurs to make this happen?meltingboilingcondensationevaporation
Otto pushed a toy car across a floor. The car traveled fast across the wood, but it slowed to a stop on the carpet. Which best explains what happened when the car reached the carpet?Inertia decreased.Gravity increased.Friction increased.Magnetism decreased.
Eye color is a physical trait. Which statement best explains why a child has a specific eye color?Eye color is a learned trait.Eye color is an inherited trait.Eye color is a trait that changes over time.Eye color is a trait that happens by chance.
Manganese has an atomic number of 25 and an atomic mass of 55 amu. How many particles are found in its nucleus?25305580
Students researched monkeys at a zoo. They recorded the monkeys' traits and behaviors. This investigation activity is best described ascontrolling.hypothesizing.observing.inferring.
The fur of an arctic fox turns from brown to white as winter approaches. This is an example ofcamouflagehibernationmigrationmovement
Which is an example of a chemical change?a rusting car fendera spinning topa spilled bucket of watera melting popsicle
Which statement is describing climate?It snowed 12 centimeters last night.Last winter was colder than normal.There is a thunderstorm watch for the local area.The temperature will be between 32°C and 37°C all week.
Scientists have categorized trees based on whether they keep or lose their leaves each year. Another logical way to categorize trees is based on thetypes of nutrients needed to grow.amount of oxygen that is released into the air.color of leaves that are produced.type of fruit that is produced.
Which resource is considered nonrenewable?wind powersolar energymoving waterfossil fuels
Sand and iron particles that are similar in size and color are mixed together in a beaker. What would be the best method of separating the particles?Use tweezers to separate them.Use a magnet to separate them.Add water to the mixture.Pour the mixture into a filter.
Which habitat on Earth would probably 28 add the greatest amount of water to the water cycle through evaporation?cold lakedesert sandwarm oceanmountain rock
Which of these actions will change a sedimentary rock, such as limestone, into a metamorphic rock, such as marble?pressure from a glacierheat from magmaerosion from flowing waterradiation from the Sun
A loaf of bread is baking in a pan in a 350° F oven. What would cause a burn to a hand the quickest because of its low specific heat?the metal panthe air in the oventhe surface of the breadthe outside of the oven door
A student poured some sugar into a glass of water. After the water was stirred, no solid sugar remained in the glass. Which statement best describes what happened?The sugar reacted with water to form elements.The sugar reacted with water to form a mixture.The sugar dissolved in water to form a solution.The sugar dissolved in water to form compounds.
The magnitude of the gravitational force between two planets depends on thespeed the planets rotate.other nearby planets.volume of the planets.distance between the planets.
The fossils that are found in the oldest layers of sedimentary rock were formed which types of organisms?only organisms that lived in the seaonly organisms that lived on landonly organisms that lived in the airorganisms that lived on the land, in the sea and in the air
A snail's shell provides the snail withfood.energy.protection.transportation.
Since green plants make their own food, they are calledpredatorspreydecomposersproducers
Which metalloid is used in solar cells and computer chips?siliconsilverarsenicantimony
The best evidence that two land areas were once connected is the discovery that both land masseshave the same climate.are in the same stage of succession.exist along the same line of longitude.have similar types of rocks and fossils.
Rachel purchased a kit for making a skateboard ramp. Which of the following is most important to have for putting the ramp together?a picture showing the colors of different ramp partsa diagram showing some ways to use the rampa list of prices for other available kitsa set of instructions for the kit materials
What is the smallest particle of the element gold (Au) that can still be classified as gold?atommoleculeneutronproton
Which best describes the function of the small intestine?oxygenation of tissueexcretion of toxic wastestransportation of blood cellsdigestion and absorption of food
A forest is flooded when a natural dam breaks, leaving the forest floor under two meters of water. Which animal is most affected by the flooding?a crowa rabbita squirrela butterfly
Which object will most likely be attracted to a magnet?wooden blockplastic cupmetal nailglass bead
At what temperature does pure water boil?0°C32°C100°C212°C
Animals that eat both plant matter and meat are referred to asdecomposers.scavengers.herbivores.omnivores.
Corals are animals that live in tropical oceans. Fossils of corals are found in Ohio. What does the presence of coral fossils suggest about how the environment of Ohio has changed over time?Ohio was once covered by warm seas.A large glacier once passed over Ohio.The average rainfall in Ohio is now much more than it once was.The average temperature in Ohio is now much warmer than it.
Alex looked at an electric toothbrush that had a plug with three metal prongs. Why are these prongs made out of metal?Metal doesn't get hot and melt when you plug it into the outlet.Metal is strong and is less likely to break when you plug it into the outlet.Metal is an insulator and prevents shocks when you plug it into the outlet.Metal is a conductor and completes a circuit when you plug it into the outlet.
Where is an igneous rock such as pumice most likely formed?in a desertin a creek bednear a volcanounder a glacier
Why are many telescopes used far from cities?The light from the cities makes it hard to see stars.The noise from the cities vibrates the telescopes.The power lines from the cities produce interference waves.The pollution from the cities reflects starlight.
Where do plants get energy from to make food?airsoilwatersunlight
Which of the following is most likely to cause water to change from one state of matter to another state of matter?increased precipitationthe weathering of rocksa decrease in wind speeda change in air temperature
When a soccer player kicks a ball, which two systems work directly with the muscular system?immune and excretorydigestive and respiratorynervous and skeletalcirculatory and integumentary
Which two activities are carried out by all species of living things?make food and eliminate wastehibernate and take in nutrientsgrow and reproducemigrate and seek shelter
Which best explains why a person infected with bacteria may have a fever?The body is responding to fight off the bacteria.The body is releasing waste material from the bacteria.The body is producing hormones to kill the infection.The body is reducing the blood supply to the infection site.
Most of the concentration of which gas results from the activity of producer organisms?nitrogenoxygenwater vaporcarbon dioxide
What is determined by the speed that Earth rotates on its axis?the length of a daythe energy that reaches a locationthe temperature of water in the oceanthe number of seasons in a year
The spectrum of visible light can be seen in a rainbow because white light isreflected and transmitted.refracted and dispersed.absorbed and diffracted.produced and emitted.
Kate sees a full moon. About how much time will go by before the next full moon?one weektwo weeksone monthone year
The sediments found in a riverbed are most likely a result of which action on nearby rock?heatfaultingpressureweathering
The most common way humans contribute to the extinction of organisms is byrotation of crops.use of fertilizers.destruction of habitat.introduction of competing species.
Which of the following is an example of matter changing state?heating a pan of water until the water is all goneputting a soft-drink can in the refrigerator to cool itheating soup on the stove until it is hot to your tonguetransferring sugar into a storage container
A car runs out of fuel while traveling on a level road and eventually comes to a stop. Which of the following best explains why the car stops?Some of the energy of the car was lost to friction.Some of the energy of the car was destroyed.The amount of kinetic energy increased.The amount of useful energy increased.
Which of the following best represents one particular stage in a life cycle?a fish swimminga seed sproutinga leaf growinga dog eating
Which process of the water cycle transports water from plants to clouds?precipitationtranspirationcondensationsublimation
Sulfur scrubbers are devices installed in coal-fired power plants. Sulfur scrubbers reduce the emission of sulfur dioxide. What environmental problem are sulfur scrubbers most likely trying to address?ozoneerosionacid rainnutrient runoff
Which system of the human body provides protection to most of the major organs?skeletal systemcirculatory systemrespiratory systemmuscular system
A scientist developed a model that described the actions of DNA in the cell nuclei, which helped explain how traits were inherited. Which scientist helped develop this model?BohrHookeMendelWatson
Which item is designed to change electrical energy into heat energy?Alarm clockHand dryerFanTelephone
Which characteristic is the best example of an inherited trait?eye coloran infectionknowledge of soccerlength of hair
Which correctly arranges three scientific terms-theory, law, and hypothesis-from least to most accepted or tested?theory, hypothesis, lawhypothesis, law, theorytheory, law, hypothesishypothesis, theory, law
The metal lid on a glass jar is hard to open, so it is held under warm, running water. What causes the jar to open easily after it was held under the water?The water increased the pressure under the lid.The jar shrunk with the warm water.The water acted as a lubricant between the glass and the metal.The metal lid expanded under warm water.
A dung beetle is an insect that gathers waste from animals, rolls it into a compact ball, lays eggs in it, and buries it in the soil. This gives the eggs a warm, safe place to hatch and provides a food source for the developing larvae. Which impact does the dung beetle most likely have on its ecosystem?It helps return nutrients to the soil.It makes animal waste harder to degrade.It causes an unhealthy accumulation of animal waste.It depletes nutrients from the soil to benefit its young.
After playing outside on a cold day, Jaime went inside to wash his hands. Although the water was normal temperature, he noticed that it felt warmer than usual. What would explain this phenomenon?His body had more kinetic energy than the water.Heat flowed from a cooler substance to a warmer substance.The water from the faucet had a higher temperature than his skin.The thermal energy in the room was higher than the thermal energy outside.
What is the relationship between tissues and organs?Organs are made from one type of tissue.Tissues are made from one type of organ.Tissues are made from different types of organs.Organs are made from different types of tissues.
What will be the most likely result for some species of animals with the continued burning of rain forests in Africa?soil erosiondestruction of their habitatsimproved nutrients in the soilmore grasses as a result of burning
Earthworms live underground in the soil. As they move through the soil, they create tunnels. The tunnels help improve the soil. Plants grow better in soil that has earthworms. Which statement explains how earthworm tunnels help plants?Earthworm tunnels bring heat into the soil that warms plant roots.Earthworm tunnels loosen the soil so plant roots can easily growEarthworm tunnels allow sunlight to reach the plant roots in the soil.Earthworm tunnels create places where insects can hide and protect plant roots.
Which tools are best used to determine the speed of a turtle as it walks along a path?Meter stick and graduated cylinderStopwatch and meter stickBalance and metric rulerBalance and stopwatch
Which tool would a student use to measure wind speed?compassbarometeranemometerweather vane
Why would explorers use a compass when traveling to unknown lands?to locate a direction to travelto measure the quality of drinking waterto protect themselves from wild animalsto determine levels of humanity in tropical areas
Which measurement tool is used to find the volume of a small piece of granite?thermometermetric rulergraduated cylindertriple beam balance
What form of energy causes an ice cube to melt?mechanicalmagneticsoundheat
Which characteristic is most beneficial for an animal living on a snowy mountain?thick furdark spotsmoist skinwebbed feet
Which of the following is a property of CO2 gas?It feels like a rock.It smells like a lemon.It is colorless.It is hard.
Which rapid changes can be caused by storms?landslides and floodingflooding and earthquakeslandslides and volcanoesvolcanoes and earthquakes
Which is an example of a chemical reaction?nails rustingglass meltingsugar dissolvingalcohol vaporizing
Which unit of measurement can be used to describe the length of a desk?centimetersgramslitersdegrees Celsius
The incompleteness of the fossil record results primarily from which phenomenon?the frequency and irregular timing of organism speciationsthe metamorphosis of most sedimentary rock by heat and pressurethe geologically rapid cycling of crust material back into the mantlethe rarity with which organic remains are exposed to fossil-forming conditions
A student conducts an investigation. In order to make a valid conclusion, she musthave a testable hypothesis.place the data in a graph.use the best technology.test multiple variables.
The bonding of oxygen to red blood cells is important to the body because it enables the body toabsorb nutrients from food.make energy from light.maintain a constant temperature.perform aerobic respiration in cells.
Some of Earth's water is stored underground in porous rock formations known as aquifers. Which of these could use up groundwater in aquifers?abundant rain in the Ozarksexcessive pumping from wellsdams on the lower Mississippicommunity water conservation
All plants and animals have mechanisms thattransport nutrientsperform photosynthesisregulate nervesproduce flowers
Which is the best tool to measure the angles of a triangular object?a meter sticka compassa protractora spring scale
All living organisms are dependent on plants because plantsproduce carbon dioxideremove oxygen from the airare producersare consumers
Compared to other stars in our galaxy, which is the best description of our Sun?larger size, higher temperaturesmaller size, higher temperaturelarger size, average temperatureaverage size, average temperature
While studying the relationship between number of trees and amount of atmospheric oxygen, which of the following would be most important to take into account?contributions to atmospheric oxygen from sources other than treesthe ways in which industrialized nations use treesthe root area of treesthe bark mass of trees
A student is working on a science project display for the school science fair. To best communicate why her conclusions are valid, what should be included on the display?a list of authoritative sources that supports her conclusioninstructions for viewers to repeat her proceduresclearly illustrated diagrams of the scientific principles involveda complete write-up of her experimental method and data collected
Which of the following describes asexual reproduction?the process of meiosis in a fruit flyfertilization of a chicken eggbinary fission in an amoebathe process of embryo development in a mouse
Which scientist is known for his genetics experiments with pea plants?Charles DarwinGregor MendelCarolus LinnaeusRobert Hooke
On a cold, cloudy day, the local weather forecaster predicts that a high-pressure system will be moving into the area in the next 24 hours. Which weather conditions will this system most likely bring to the area?stormysunnysnowyhot
What determines if twins are identical?their genestheir behaviortheir environmenttheir personalities
Which of these processes is a conversion made by solar panels?mechanical energy to nuclear energythermal energy to chemical energykinetic energy to potential energyradiant energy to electrical energy
In fruit flies, red eyes are dominant over sepia eyes. A male with red eyes is crossed with a female with sepia eyes producing first generation offspring that all had sepia eyes. What does this indicate about the flies that were crossed?Both parents are homozygous for the trait.Both parents are heterozygous for the trait.The male is heterozygous and the female is homozygous recessive for the trait.The male is homozygous dominant and the female is heterozygous for the trait.
Acid rain caused by industrial pollution greatly reduces the number of trees in a forested region that is home to a particular species of bird. How might this decrease in the number of trees most likely affect this bird population?The population will adapt to ground dwelling.The population will decrease due to lack of resources.The population will stabilize when it moves to another region.The population will increase as predators move out of the region.
Which of these is the main function of a cell wall?To make foodTo store waterTo provide supportTo make the plant green
Which sentence about the periodic table of elements is true?All elements in period 2 are metals.All elements in group 18 are metals.Metals are found on the left side of the periodic table.Metals are found on the right side of the periodic table.
Salt concentration, water temperature, plankton, and the whale shark might all be used in a description of an oceanclimate.food web.ecosystem.population.
Rocks can be classified many different ways, including as igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary. This classification is based on theorigin of the rocks.use of the rocks.size of the rocks.hardness of the rocks.
A mountain range has hills around its edges. How are the mountains and hills alike?Both have grass at the top.Both are at least 1000 meters tall.Both have liquid rock at their centers.Both are taller than the land around them.
Human muscle cells need nutrients and oxygen during exercise. The human body is able to meet the needs of the muscle cells during exercise by increasingdigestion.excretion.secretion.circulation.
Phyllis investigated what happened when she added some different substances to water. Which substance can combine with water to form a solution?oilrockssoilsugar
Fossil fuels are considered a nonrenewable resource because theyhave turned into solid rock.take a long period of time to form.are expensive to remove from rock.are located deep within the Earth's crust.
A student is growing some plants for an experiment. She notices small white spots on the leaves. Which tool should she use to get a better look at the spots?thermometerhand lensgraduated cylinderbalance
Why are seals able to live off the coast of Antarctica while frogs, snakes, and panthers are not?Seals can swim.Seals are predators.Seals have fur and blubber.Seals are warm-blooded animals.
How are the functions of a carbohydrate and a lipid similar?Both are a source of energy.Both are replicated during meiosis.Both lower the activation energy of reactions.Both dissolve nutrients in the digestive system.
Traveling in opposite directions, buses A and B are passing each other at the relative speed of 25 km/h, while a passenger on bus A walks toward the back of the bus at the speed of 5 km/h. What is the velocity of the passenger on bus A relative to bus B?20 km/h in the direction of bus A20 km/h in the direction of bus B30 km/h in the direction of bus A30 km/h in the direction of bus B
A student drops a ball. Which force causes the ball to fall to the ground?electricityfrictiongravitymagnetism
Hydrogen is located on the left side of the periodic table in the same column as the alkali metals, but it has characteristics of a nonmetal. Which of the following is a physical property of hydrogen?Hydrogen can bond to itself.Hydrogen makes positive ions.Hydrogen is a gas at room temperature.Hydrogen is combustible.
In an experiment, a scientist named Pavlov rang a bell before he fed his dogs, which made the dogs drool. Soon the dogs would drool when they heard the bell, even if they did not receive any food. What type of response did the dogs exhibit?an instinctan inherited traita learned behaviora conscious behavior
Which invention will best help people travel quickly to far away places?carboatairplaneskateboard
What is an environmental threat posed by oil and gas acquisition and transport that is not posed by the acquisition and transport of the energy resources uranium, and wood?habitat changevehicle pollutionpipeline leakssoil compaction and loss
Some plant species are more tolerant of acidic soil than others. The tolerant species are favored in areas affected by which consequence of human activity?mixing of pollutants with rainerosion of topsoil by clearcuttingrunoff of fertilizer used in farmingthinning of the atmospheric ozone layer
Which resource has the most potential for production of renewable electric energy?coaloilnatural gasgeothermal
A layer of solid brittle rock comprises the outer 100 kilometers of Earth. This layer, which contains both the crust and the upper mantle, is called thecore.sediment.lithosphere.hemisphere.
During its lifetime, which object is known to change in brightness, color, and temperature?starmoonasteroidplanet
What causes a free falling object to accelerate?inertiagravityinitial speedinitial direction
What is the main source of energy that drives all weather patterns?the Sunoceansthe Moonmountains
What is one factor that contributes to seasons occurring in New York State?the revolution of the Moon around Earththe tilt of Earth on its axisthe rising and falling of ocean tidesthe distance of Earth from the Sun
Which cell part is correctly paired with its function?nucleus-controls cell activitieschloroplast-outside boundary of plant cellscell wall-controls what goes in and out of cellscell membrane-where photosynthesis takes place
A meeting of scientists, called a symposium, occurs every year to share recent research about the atmosphere of Earth. This symposium mainly serves which purpose in science?to test research methods used by other scientiststo develop questions about space researchto discuss the meaning of new discoveriesto explain gas properties to the general public
A wind turbine primarily uses which type of energy?nuclearthermalchemicalmechanical
A rubber band will make a sound when it isvibrated.stretched.cut into pieces.shot across a room.
What would a warm air mass over the ocean most likely cause?earthquakesnowfalltsunamirainfall
The Moon is visible to observers on Earth because ofreflected sunlightabsorbed light from Earth's atmospheregases in the Moon's interiorvolcanic eruptions on the Moon's surface
Which illness is always caused by an infection?a heart attacka broken boneinfluenzacancer
Jonny climbed an apple tree. How are Jonny and the apple tree similar to each other?Both are made of cells.Both take in carbon dioxide.Both get nutrients directly from soil.Both get energy from other organisms.
What are the names of the products in the chemical equation shown below? HCl + NaHCO_{3} -> NaCl + CO_{2} + H_{2}Ohydrochloric acid and sodium carbonatesodium chloride, carbon dioxide, and waterhydrogen chloride and sodium bicarbonatesodium chloride, carbon monoxide, and dihydrogen oxide
A ball is tossed up in the air and it comes back down. The ball comes back down because ofgravityfrictionerosionmagnetism
Timber companies can best manage the number of trees in forests byconverting deforested areas into malls.planting trees to replace what they cut down.adding pesticides to the soil around the trees.removing the tree stumps when trees are cut down.
The formation of the Himalayan Mountains is one example of land features caused by compressive forces. Which action most likely led to the formation of these mountains?seafloor spreadingstrike-slip faultingcolliding plateshot spots
What abiotic factor would most likely signal a population of birds that it is time to migrate from north to south?decrease in sunlightchange in precipitationincrease in food sourcechange in wind direction
A greenhouse is used as a model of the atmosphere. Which of the following cannot be demonstrated by the model?energy used to evaporate waterchanges in greenhouse gaseslight energy trapped as heat energyenergy that builds up in the greenhouse air
A light bulb manufacturer claims its light bulb is "twice as bright" per unit of electrical energy consumed as the leading light bulb. If this claim is correct, what factor must be accurately compared between the two bulbs?how much each bulb weighshow long each bulb lastshow much heat each bulb releaseshow much metal each bulb contains
In the 17th century, Gregor Mendel crossed pea plants with different traits and observed the results in their offspring. To which of these did Mendel contribute most directly with his work?medicineagriculturescience of force and motionscience of heredity and variation
How does the appearance of a constellation change during the night?Its shape appears to become longer.Its position appears to shift relative to the horizon.Its brightest stars begin to appear orange.Its distance to the North Star decreases.
The freezing and thawing action of water affects a rock bytransforming the rock into igneous rock.chemically changing the rock.gradually breaking down the rock into smaller pieces.leaving behind sedimentary particles from evaporated solutions.
Delilah put a container of water in the freezer and left it there overnight. The next morning she saw that the water in the container had changed to ice. Which of the following statements best explains why the water changed to ice?The water gained energy.The water absorbed light.Mass was released from the water.Heat was taken away from the water.
Earth's rotation (turning on its axis) causesthe seasons to change.the Moon to appear as different shapes.day and night.solar eclipses.
Which of the following climates has cold winters and hot summers?polarsubtropicaltemperatetropical
What form of energy is being used when a person pushes a wooden block across the floor?mechanicalmagneticsoundelectrical
Which action is an example of good water management?letting faucets dripwatering the grass every dayturning off the faucet when brushing teethrunning the dishwasher when it is not full
An Earth year is the length of time it takes forEarth to rotate once on its axisthe Moon to revolve once around Earththe Sun to revolve once around EarthEarth to revolve once around the Sun
Which land form results when carbonic acid in groundwater seeps through rock and dissolves limestone?valleysravinescavernsmountains
Which part of a DNA molecule represents encoded information?phosphatesugarguaninehydrogen bond
Early scientists most likely saw a discharge of electricity for the first time when observing awaterfallrainbowlightning stormvolcano erupting
In humans, the amount of sugar in blood is controlled by the release of a hormone called insulin. This process is an example ofdepletiondigestionregulationexcretion
It is necessary to add a day to the calendar every four years becausethe axis of Earth is tilted.the gravitational pull of the Sun affects Earth's revolution.the revolution of Earth is not exactly 365 days.the Moon crosses the orbit of the Sun every 28 days.
Which tool would be best to measure the length of a butterfly?triple beam balancegraduated cylindermetric rulerthermometer
Scientists invented a liquid that removes grease and keeps the skin soft. How could this discovery most likely be used?to improve dish soapto cure a diseaseto make clothesto grow plants
The first step in the water cycle is evaporation. What gives water the energy to evaporate?Sunwindcloudswaves
On a warm sunny afternoon, ocean water splashed onto a rock. A short time later, the rock was dry. Which statement best explains what happened to the water on the rock?Heat caused the water to become a gas.Heat melted the water and it disappeared.Salt caused the water to become a gas.Salt melted the water and it disappeared.
Which is a nonrenewable natural resource that is used to make electrical energy?coalwindwaterthermal
Which process initiates the passage of half of a parent's DNA to offspring?meiosismitosisfertilizationdifferentiation
Which resource provides the minerals plants need to grow?sunlightwatersoilair
At what time on a sunny day will the shadow of the school's flagpole be the shortest?sunrisenoonmid-afternoonsunset
Animals get energy for growth and repair fromsoilfoodwaterair
A flower produces seeds that fall to the ground and grow into new plants that produce more flowers. The seeds begin to grow by the process offertilization.germination.maturation.pollination.
A rock has most likely traveled a long distance from its place of origin if it isvery small.rounded and smooth.partially faded.rough and dense.
Which of the following best explains why the tectonic plates of Earth move?conduction from solar heatingheat convection from the mantleglobal windsocean currents
Over a long period of time, a rocky volcanic island that previously did not support any form of life got transformed into a dense forested region. Which of these species is most likely to have been the pioneer species that initiated this transformation?fernsgrasseslichensmushrooms
The formation of coal deposits occurred over millions of years. Which feature was most responsible for these deposits?barren desertsactive volcanoesmountains covered in treesswamps with dense vegetation
A teacher is performing a demonstration about static electricity for his class by rubbing a balloon against a wool sweater. The balloon sticks to the wool sweater. Which particles are exchanged during the demonstration?atomsprotonsneutronselectrons
After a race, a newspaper lists the names of the five fastest runners. Another method that could be used to identify the five fastest runners is to make a chart that shows theaverage of the speeds of the runners.total distance for each runner.time it took each runner to run the race.percentage of the runners who finished the race.
A scientist plans to investigate the nervous system of sea slugs. What should the scientist do first?Develop a theory about sea slugs that can be tested.Go to the ocean to observe the behavior of sea slugs.Obtain several sea slugs and conduct experiments with them.Review the research other scientists have done on sea slugs.
Natural selection is a mechanism that acts on individuals within a population. Which is a result of the process of natural selection?The reproductive rate of the population decreases.Genetic similarity within the population increases.Organisms are better adapted to their environment.Adverse changes to the environment become more frequent.
What chemical symbol represents the element iron?FeIIrPb
A push or a pull on an object is an example offorce.weight.energy.work.
Which statement is a description of weather?Summers in Tucson are hot and dry.Winters in Flagstaff are cold and snowy.The temperature is 55° F in Winslow today.The Sun will set in Yuma today at 6:45 p.m.
Clouds and precipitation moved across western Massachusetts one evening. The temperature changed from 41°F to 28°F. Which of the following changes in precipitation most likely occurred on this evening?sleet changing to hailsnow changing to rainrain changing to sleetsnow changing to hail
The human body has an average, normal temperature of about 98.6ºF. To keep the core body temperature from becoming too high, the brain sends a signal to the body todecrease sugar levels in the blood.increase sugar levels in the blood.decrease blood flow to the skin.increase blood flow to the skin.
Why is water considered to be a renewable resource?Water can be used over again.Water can be found all over Earth.Water can dissolve other substances.Water is needed by organisms to stay alive.
What is the most prominent land feature formed by the convergence of the Indo-Australian and Eurasian plates?ChinaAustraliaUral MountainsHimalaya Mountains
To which group does an animal belong if it lays eggs and has scales and gills?amphibianbirdfishreptile
What causes nighttime and daytime on Earth?the Sun rotating on its axisEarth rotating on its axisEarth revolving around the Sunthe Moon revolving around Earth
Which area is coldest?rainforesttundragrasslandreef
Which scientist is credited with using a telescope in the seventeenth century to discover the moons of Jupiter?GalileoKeplerEinsteinNewton
Which of these is a freshwater reservoir?Gulf of MexicoPacific OceanAtlantic tidal basinAntarctic polar ice
In eukaryotic organisms, microtubules give cells structure, and microfilaments help the cell contract and move. Together, they combine to perform functions similar to what two human body systems?the endocrine and skeletal systemsthe circulatory and respiratory systemsthe skeletal and muscular systemsthe integumentary and excretory system
Which kind of rock is produced by deposition and cementation?marble, a metamorphic rocksandstone, a sedimentary rockgranite, an intrusive igneous rockpumice, an extrusive igneous rock
Which characteristic is inherited rather than learned?telling a storysaluting the flaghaving blue eyesriding a bicycle
Which biological process in mammals occurs largely due to cell division?healingrespirationdecompositionphotosynthesis
Frame construction predominates in the New England area due to the abundance ofclay.masonry.wood.steel.
Which of these properties of water helps moderate the weather of coastal areas?neutral pHhigh specific heatdissolves many substancesfloats as a solid
Birds eat non-camouflaged moths at a higher rate than they eat camouflaged moths. In which situation would birds eat the moths at the slowest rate?dark moths in any environmentlight moths in any environmentdark moths in a light environmentlight moths in a light environment
During which process does a caterpillar become a butterfly?fertilizationmetamorphosisasexual reproductionbiological adaptation
Gregor Mendel cross-pollinated red and white snapdragon flowers. What information indicates that incomplete dominance was achieved?The offspring had heterozygous alleles.The offspring had a recessive allele.The offspring were pink.The offspring were red.
What is the major function of the human excretory system?eliminate waste materialsrespond to stimulibreak down food mechanicallyabsorb nutrients from food
Yumiko gave some reasons why kettles and kitchen pans are often made of copper. Which reason is correct?Copper is a good conductor of heat.Copper is easy to melt.Copper is difficult to shape.Copper dissolves in hot water.
In most animals, combinations of various tissues make up functional units calledepithelial cells.organs.organ systems.populations.
How do the spines of a cactus help it survive?Spines help the cactus get moisture.Spines anchor the cactus in the ground.Spines protect the cactus from animals.Spines support the stems and branches of the cactus.
Water enters a plant cell through thecell wall.chloroplasts.mitochondria.nucleus.
People are developing electric cars that would replace gasoline-burning cars. One major advantage of the electric car is that itaccelerates faster.causes less pollution.gives a smoother ride.needs no battery.
Which group of organisms would all be found living in a tropical rain forest?Lizards, insects, cacti, kangaroosVines, palm trees, tree frogs, monkeysEvergreens, moose, weasels, minkLichens, mosses, caribou, polar bears
Which SI unit would be most appropriate for recording the length of a typical classroom?gramkilogrammeterkilometer
If two objects are two meters apart, which of these changes will increase the gravitational force between the two objects?decreasing the mass of one objectdecreasing the mass of both objectsmoving the objects to one meter apartmoving the objects to three meters apart
Which of these cell structures converts nutrients to energy for cell functions?cell membranechloroplastsmitochondriaendoplasmic reticulum
Cumulonimbus clouds often form along cold fronts. Which type of weather is most likely to occur along a cold front?moderate temperature with mild breezesstorms with hurricane windsrain with possible severe thunderstormshigh temperatures with low winds
An eagle is a bird that reproduces by laying its eggs in a dry nest. Which animal lays its eggs in a place most similar to the eagle?amphibianfishmammalreptile
The chemical formula for water is H_{2}O. What does the formula show about each element in the compound?the number of valence electronsthe charge of the compoundthe mass of protons in each atomthe number of atoms of each element
How far from Earth is an object that is 10 light years from Earth?10,000 km10,000,000 kmthe distance light can travel in 10 yearsten times the distance from Earth to the Sun
The oceans most influence global climate byreleasing heat to the atmosphere.cooling bordering land masses.providing continuous onshore winds.removing water vapor from the atmosphere.
A science class investigated the percentage of corn kernels that pop in bags of different brands of popcorn. Fifteen students tested three brands of popcorn each and reported their results to the class. Why did the teacher most likely have so many students report the results?for more accurate resultsfor more student participationto help simplify the procedureto help explain the hypothesis
The smallest part of an element that retains the properties of the element is theproton.nucleus.electron.atom.
What is the composition of the nucleus of an atom?ions and electronselectrons and protonsprotons and neutronsneutrons and electrons
Which of these would best be shown as a 3-D model?color spectrummagnetic fieldskeletal systemwater cycle
A root emerges from a seed because of the force ofwater against the seed coat.air pushing on the seed.gravity on the seed.soil pressing on the seed.
Which of these is the BEST reason to study weather?To be prepared for stormsTo learn how fossils are formedTo see changing phases of the MoonTo find ways for animals to live longer
A recycling plant manager needs to melt 1500 kg of scrap copper to sell to a wire manufacturer. The copper is at 15°C and its melting point is 1083°C. The copper has a specific heat of 385 J/kg x K. How much heat is required to raise the temperature of the copper to its melting point?6.2 x 10^8 J6.3 x 10^8 J7.7 x 10^8 J7.9 x 10^8 J
A decomposer is an organism thatpreys on other animalseats only plantsrecycles nutrientsuses sunlight to make food
Which type of scientist would study the relationship between simple machines and energy?chemistbiologistphysicistgeologist
The seeds of an oak come from the ___.fruitleafrootstem
A manufacturer wants to produce a container for food storage that does not break easily and is airtight, inexpensive, and microwave-safe. Which of the following is the best material to use to make the container?glassmetalpaperplastic
When carbon and oxygen combine chemically, the mass of the product isgreater than the mass of the carbon plus the mass of the oxygenequal to the mass of the carbon plus the mass of the oxygenequal to the mass of the carbonless than the mass of the carbon
Juvenile diabetes is a disease caused by the body's inability to create insulin. The body's white blood cells attack the pancreatic cells that produce insulin. This type of disease is known asa cardiovascular disease.an infectious disease.a digestive system disease.an autoimmune disease.
Which of these describes a property of all matter?All matter gives off light.All matter is attracted by magnets.All matter is made of atoms.All matter dissolves in water.
Which of the following is a characteristic of all chemical changes?A different state of matter is produced.Some mass is converted to energy.Some form of light is given off.A new material is formed.
What is the complementary base of adenine in DNA?cytosinethymineguanineuracil
What is the density of a 64-g iron cube that displaces 8 mL of water?512 g/mL32 g/mL8 g/mL4 g/mL
What keeps Mars in orbit around the Sun?frictiongravitymagnetismsolar power
Which material is primarily a mixture of weathered rock and organic matter?mineralssoilocean waterseashells
How do plants most commonly break large rocks into smaller pieces?Plant leaves insulate surrounding rocks from extreme temperatures.Plant roots grow into cracks in rocks.Seeds from plants fall onto rocks and release acidic compounds.Stems of plants surround and squeeze rocks.
Which statement best describes the climate of Nevada?Temperature at night dropped behind a cold front.Wind increased during the day.Humidity is low throughout every summer.Air pressure increased gradually all week.
What is the primary function of skin cells?to deliver messages to the brainto generate movement of musclesto provide a physical barrier to the bodyto produce carbohydrates for energy
Some plants grow only in specific places in the world. Some cacti, for example, grow only in deserts. Which of the following is most important in determining where a plant can grow and survive?animalsclimatetideswind
A geologist found fossils of horse bones in different rock layers of a canyon. The fossils in the lower levels show shorter bones than those in the upper-level fossils. Which conclusion is based on the geologist's observations?Horse's reproduce using two parents.Horse's became larger over time.Smaller Horse's went extinct, and then larger Horse's formed.Smaller Horse's are better suited to the environment than larger Horse's.
Which of the following is a reason life in the outermost planets is less likely than life on planets nearer the Sun?They have too little mass.They have too much mass.Their surfaces are extremely hot.Their surfaces are extremely cold.
Which statement best explains how periods on the periodic table are organized?increasing atomic number from left to rightincreasing number of neutrons from left to rightdecreasing number of electrons from left to rightdecreasing atomic mass number from left to right
Nonrenewable sources of energy have limited supplies. Researchers are developing devices that will make renewable energy more available. Which is a source of renewable energy?coalgasolineoilwind
Which of these living things in a grassland ecosystem depend on the presence of a variety of bacteria and other microorganisms in the soil?worms onlygreen plants onlyplants and animals onlyall the organisms in the ecosystem
An ecosystem is a community of organisms interacting with their physical environment. Why are decomposers an important part of ecosystems?They break down dead organisms to return nutrients to the soil.They produce their own food for survival.They play a role in preventing weathering and erosion.They provide most of the energy to consumers.
Which term identifies a group of cells that work together to perform a similar function?moleculeorganorganismtissue
Which of these statements is not considered part of the Big Bang Theory?The universe is expanding.The universe never changes.The universe began in a hot, dense state.The universe began at a single point and time.
Cells in the body use oxygen (O2) for cellular respiration. Which is the result of cellular respiration?ATP is produced and carbon dioxide (CO2) is released.ATP is consumed and carbon dioxide (CO2) is released.ATP is produced and carbon dioxide (CO2) is absorbed.ATP is consumed and carbon dioxide (CO2) is absorbed.
Which geologic process is absent from the Gulf Coast states?beach developmentsubduction zonesweatheringerosion
The human body gets the energy it needs for growth and repair directly fromsoilfoodsunlightwater
In what type of rock would a geologist most likely find evidence of ancient life?sedimentaryfoliatedmetamorphicvolcanic
During the Apollo 14 moon landing, astronauts played golf on the moon. Which of the following would be less on the moon than on Earth?The mass of the golf ballThe weight of the golf ballThe mass and size of the golf ballThe weight and size of the golf ball
Evaporation, condensation, and precipitation are all processes which occur in thewater cycle.energy cycle.carbon cycle.nitrogen cycle.
Directions Read the information about wind erosion then answer the question. Wind can cause erosion that changes the surface of the Earth. Wind erosion can have negative effects on the environment by removing soil and polluting the air during dust storms. Walter wanted to find out if faster wind speeds increased the amount of wind erosion. Which instrument should he use to measure wind speed?anemometerbarometerrain gaugethermometer
Where does oxygen-rich blood go after leaving the lungs?the brain.the heart.the kidney.the stomach.
Chemical pesticides are sometimes sprayed on crops to kill insects that eat the crops. People have different viewpoints about the use of pesticides on crops. What might be a concern about using pesticides on the crops?Will the food ripen?Will the food stay fresh?Will the food harm humans?Will the food harm bugs in the home?
The number of fish in a lake suddenly increases. How will the increase most likely affect the lake?There will be less water in the lake.More plants will grow in the lake.More frogs will live in the lake.There will be fewer insects in the lake.
Which statement correctly describes a relationship between two human body systems?The digestive system absorbs nutrients which are transported by the nervous system.The digestive system absorbs nutrients which are transported by the circulatory system.The circulatory system exchanges gases which are transported by the nervous system.The circulatory system exchanges gases which are transported by the digestive system.
Which statement best explains Earth's day and night cycle?Earth rotates once each day on its axis.Earth revolves around the Sun each year.The Sun is closest to Earth during the day.The tilt of Earth changes throughout the year.
What is the first thing a student should do if an accident happens during a science experiment?report to the teacherclean the laboratory stationlocate the nearest exitput on safety goggles
Which of the following helps keep the Moon in its orbit?frictiongravitylongitudelatitude
Which process allows green plants to control the amount of water stored in their leaves?photosynthesiscondensationrespirationtranspiration
What is a job of white blood cells?transport oxygenremove wastefight diseaseenable reproduction
Which is an example of kinetic energy?a book sitting on a shelfa ball rolling down a hilla runner about to start a racea window getting hot from the sun
A new mutation that occurs in which type of cell can be passed on to offspring?blood cellnerve cellbrain cellegg cell
When too much salt is detected in the bloodstream, the brain secretes a hormone that helps the body retain water by reducing the amount of urine produced. This is an example ofa feedback loop.an acquired trait.a balanced ecosystem.a symbiotic relationship.
Which of these is a safe practice in a laboratory investigation when working with chemicals?pouring unused chemicals down the sinkmixing leftover chemicals in one containerwearing safety goggles when working with chemicalsreturning unused chemicals to the original container
Which change in the environment would have a negative effect on the survival of a species in an ecosystem?increase in the population of preyintroduction of a competing speciesdecrease in the population of predatorsincrease in genetic diversity of the species
An element is identified byits number of protons.the atomic mass.the type of charge.its number of isotopes.
Which of these dissolve in water?Sand grainsSugar cubesPlastic strawsWooden spoons
What is the main function of a plant stem?to collect pollen from other plants to make seedsto absorb water and plant nutrients from the soilto carry food and water to the rest of the plantto make food for the plant
Naturally occurring variations within a species are mainly the result of mutations andsexual reproductiondynamic equilibriummetabolismcamouflage
As a sample of water turns to ice,new molecules are formed.the mass of the sample is increased.the arrangement of the molecules changes.energy is absorbed by the molecules.
An ice cube is placed in a pan. The pan is placed over an open flame. Which change will most likely happen over time?The ice changes to a liquid and back to a solid.The ice changes to a liquid then to a gas.The ice changes to a gas and back to a solid.The ice changes to a gas then to a liquid.
Byron is investigating how temperature affects mold growth on bread. Before starting his procedure, Byron states in his journal that he thinks wet bread placed in the refrigerator will grow the most mold. Which term best describes Byron's statement?conclusionresulthypothesisvariable
The telephone was invented in Boston byAlexander Graham Bell.Samuel F. B. Morse.Henry Ford.Thomas Alva Edison.
Which characteristic can an amoeba change that a paramecium cannot change?sexshapecolorposition
A metal spoon was left in a pot of boiling soup. The cook burned a finger by touching the spoon. Why did the finger get burned?The metal spoon chemically reacted with the cook's hand.The metal spoon conducted electricity to the cook's hand.The metal spoon conducted heat to the cook's hand.The metal spoon insulated the cook's hand.
Light rays are focused by the lens of a camera through the process ofreflection.refraction.dispersion.diffraction.
Which of these provides the best evidence that the distribution of Earth's oceans has changed over time?hot spots on ocean floorsseismic activity along plate boundariessediment buildup on continental slopemarine fossils found on land masses
Which change would have the greatest negative impact on the survival of an owl species?an increase in primary consumer populationan decrease in acid rainan decrease in size of habitatan increase in producers
Which organ removes cell waste from the blood?the large intestinethe small intestinethe kidneythe heart
According to the Big Bang Theory, how is the universe changing?It is contracting.It is expanding.Only the rim is expanding.Only the center is contracting.
Light enters the human eye through theretina.pupil.iris.lens.
The stages in the life cycle of an organism are shown below. birth -> growth -> development -> reproduction -> death In which life cycle stage will a new organism be made?growthdevelopmentreproductiondeath
Baby chicks peck their way out of their shells when they hatch. This activity is an example of which of the following types of behavior?instinctivelearnedplannedsocial
Which conclusion can be made about earthworms because they do not have an internal skeleton?They are invertebrates.They have radial symmetry.They are made of one segment.They have an open circulatory system.
The smallest unit of a plant that can perform all of the processes of life is theleaf.cell.tissue.root.
Soda water is a liquid that has bubbles of carbon dioxide in it. Which term best describes soda water?a mixturea moleculean elementa compound
All stars start forming in the same manner. Some follow the life cycle of the Sun, while others turn into neutron stars or black holes. Which property determines the fate of a star as it develops?masslocationluminositytemperature
If a neutral atom loses an electron, what is formed?A gasAn ionAn acidA molecule
A student mixed baking soda with vinegar and observed that the reaction was endothermic. When is a reaction endothermic?when it is reversiblewhen it can be repeatedwhen it requires heat to make it happenwhen energy is released by the process
What is the primary energy source that drives all weather events, including precipitation, hurricanes, and tornados?the Sunthe MoonEarth's gravityEarth's rotation
Which system absorbs and carries food from the digestive system to the rest of the body?nervous systemmuscular systemcirculatory systemrespiratory system
Why do planets stay in orbit around the Sun?attraction of gravityeffect of inertiafrictional forcerotational force
Earth rotates on its north-south axis. Which statement best describes one complete rotation?It takes six months and causes summer and winter seasons.It takes 24 hours and causes night and day.It takes 29 days, which represents one cycle of the Moon's phases.It takes 365 days, which represents one Earth year.
A rock sample will most likely containplants.minerals.water.wood.
A jet plane is moving at a constant velocity on a flat surface. Which forces act against the forward motion of the plane?gravity and engine thrustengine thrust and frictionfriction and air resistanceair resistance and gravity
Atmospheric greenhouse gases help heat the atmosphere byincreasing the amount of solar radiation reaching Earth.storing energy produced by human activity.absorbing infrared radiation released by Earth.increasing the average density of air.
Scurvy is a disease that sailors often got on long voyages. It was discovered that scurvy could be prevented by eating oranges and lemons. This suggests that scurvy is a disease caused byexposure to sea aira nutritional deficiencya microorganismlack of exercise
Runoff from farms that use fertilizers is entering a small lake. This will most directly affect the lake by causingthe lake to dry up.algae to grow in the lake.the lake to become deeper.water in the lake to become solid.
Why is protein an important part of a healthy diet?It is needed to change glucose to energy.It is needed to store nutrients.It is needed to repair tissue.It is needed to produce water.
An atom will always havea single, negatively-charged nucleus.equal numbers of protons and electrons."shared" electrons from another atom.a stable number of charged neutrons.
Students on two different school campuses are comparing the growth rate of grass three weeks after fertilizer has been applied. The same fertilizer and the same amount of water are used on both campuses. Which additional variable is most important to control when the results of the two investigations are compared?type of grass usedamount of trees in the areathe weather conditions of the daythe time of day the measurements are taken
A caterpillar changing into a butterfly is an example ofinstinct.duplication.reproduction.metamorphosis.
Some immune cells are actively involved in ingesting, destroying, and presenting invading microbial antigens on their surface to stimulate other cells to produce antibodies. Which of these cells is responsible for initiating such an immune response?mast cellsphagocytesB-lymphocytesT-lymphocytes
A single prokaryotic cell can divide several times in an hour. Few eukaryotic cells can divide as quickly. Which of the following statements best explains this difference?Eukaryotic cells are smaller than prokaryotic cells.Eukaryotic cells have less DNA than prokaryotic cells.Eukaryotic cells have more cell walls than prokaryotic cells.Eukaryotic cells are more structurally complex than prokaryotic cells.
Which biological process determines the probability that particular alleles will be found in any given gamete?mutationmeiosiscell cycleprotein synthesis
When a person speaks into a telephone, sound energy is changed mostly into which form of energy?heatlightelectricalchemical
In the human body, what part of the central nervous system connects with other nerves outside of the central nervous system?dendritecerebrumcerebellumspinal cord
Photovoltaic cells capture photons of sunlight and transform them directly into electricity. Many of Earth's other energy resources are simply transformed solar energy. Which two energy resources store energy that did not begin as solar energy?oil and coalwind and woodnuclear and geothermalhydropower and natural gas
What determines how long the Moon takes to complete one cycle of phases?the period of rotation of the Moon around its axisthe period of revolution of the Moon around Earththe period of rotation of Earth around its axisthe period of revolution of Earth around the Sun
Oxygen reacts with iron to produce rust and with hydrogen to produce water. Which statement describes both reactions?A different mixture is formed in each case.A different solution is formed in each case.Both a change of state and of elements is involved.New molecules are formed but the same elements exist.
What is the primary job of red blood cells?transport oxygenremove wastefight diseaseallow reproduction
What kingdom contains organisms that are multicellular, have no chlorophyll, and absorb nutrients from decaying tissue?FungiPlantaeProtistaAnimalia
A salvage yard contains a mixture of iron, glass, aluminum, and plastic. Which property of iron does the salvage yard take advantage of when separating the iron from the rest of the materials?magneticelectricalductilitymalleability
While a sailor was out fishing, he got lost at sea. Which object would help him direct the boat back to shore?RopeMagnetic compassBlanketMeasuring tape
Water is a very important part of the physical weathering of rock. Which of these properties of water is most important in causing some of the physical weathering of rock?Water is a liquid at room temperature.Water can contain different minerals.Water expands when it freezes.Water dissolves many chemicals.
A student uses a telescope to view stars at night. The student notices some of the stars are different colors. The color of a star is determined most by itssize.distance from Earth.mass.temperature.
Which function is performed at similarly structured sites in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?protein synthesispackaging and transport of proteinsstorage of genetic materialrelease of energy from storage forms
Which material is the best natural resource to use for making water-resistant shoes?cottonleatherplasticwool
When hunting by humans causes a species to become extinct, this may produce damaging effects throughout the ecosystem of the extinct species. What is the cause of this damage?alteration of a food webdegradation of a habitatmodification of a climatereversal of a flow of energy
Sarah's class is learning about mixtures and solutions. Her teacher writes four statements on the board. Which statement best describes a mixture?Both substances mix evenly.Both substances can evaporate.One substance dissolves into another.One substance can be separated from the other.
Which of the following best explains why the Sun appears to move across the sky every day?The Sun rotates on its axis.Earth rotates on its axis.The Sun orbits around Earth.Earth orbits around the Sun.
The theory of spontaneous generation was eventually disproved scientifically byarguments in philosophy.chemical analysis of material.examining models of the process.conducting a controlled experiment.
Discarded electronic devices, such as outdated computers and cell phones, contain materials that can be toxic to the environment. Which statement best explains why humans continue to use these technologies?Electronics have become less expensive over time.Some areas have recycling programs for electronics.Industries that produce electronics help the economy.Humans value the benefits of these devices over their cost.
A student crumples up a sheet of paper. Which property of the paper has changed?colormassstateshape
When a plant dies, it often decomposes and becomes part of the soil. This process is one step in which cycle?lunarwatercarbonenergy
Which would best aid a scientist in discovering how Earth may have changed over time?finding the nest of a bald eagletracking the footprints of a wolfanalyzing the pollination of a sunflowerdiscovering a fossil of a seashell in a wooded area
Kendall studied the ways in which human body systems work together. He compared the respiratory and circulatory systems. In which way are these two systems similar to each other?They both bring oxygen to the body.They both send messages to the body.They both digest nutrients for the body.They both pump blood through the body.
A difference between the oceanic crust and the continental crust is that the oceanic crust iscomposed chiefly of sedimentary rocks.more dense than the continental crust.older than the continental crust.continually being created.
Which of these elements is found in the greatest amount in organisms?carbonironleadneon
After mining removes layers of rock from a hillside, new plants begin to grow in the cracks of the bare rock. The plants beginning to grow are an example of which natural process?secondary succession in an existing ecosystemnew species developing in an ecosystemspecies competition in a communityprimary succession in a new habitat
Improvements in farming technology would most likelyincrease the amount of food produced.change global climate conditions.promote unhealthy dietary choices.decrease the amount of daily exercise.
In a container, a mixture of water and salt is stirred so that the salt dissolves completely. Sand is added to this solution and allowed to settle to the bottom of the container. If the container is placed on a heat source and the liquid evaporates completely, what will be left in the container?Nothing will remain in the container.Only salt will remain in the container.Only sand will remain in the container.Salt and sand will both remain in the container.
Which of the following is formed immediately after fertilization?eggspermzygoteembryo
Which of the following helped lead to the invention of personal computers?Internetkeyboardwireless transmitterintegrated circuit
Blood absorbs oxygen in theheart.lungs.stomach.muscles.
A student adds sugar, spices, and salt to a bowl of peanuts and stirs them together. What has the student made?a compounda substancea mixturea solution
Over time, non-volcanic mountains can form due to the interaction of plate boundaries. Which interaction is most likely associated with the formation of non-volcanic mountains?oceanic plates colliding with oceanic platesoceanic plates separating from oceanic platescontinental plates colliding with continental platescontinental plates separating from continental plates
Most stars in the Milky Way are like the Sun. The Sun will eventually become a red giant. After the red giant stage, what determines whether a star will become a white dwarf or a supernova?the mass of the starthe diameter of the starthe brightness of the starthe type of gas in the star
How should researchers share their findings with other scientists to validate their study of the effectiveness of a new medication?e-mail the research results to local newspaperspublish the research results in a scientific journalpublish the results in brochures for doctorsdiscuss the research results on the Internet
Gaseous sulfur dioxide is a compound that combines with water in the atmosphere to form acid rain. What is the primary source of sulfur dioxide?volcanic emissionscombustion of fossil fuelsdestruction of tropical forestsmining and mineral extraction
The motion of Earth is responsible for several celestial events. Which of the following events is caused by Earth revolving around the sun?the days in a yearthe hours in a daythe changes in the atmosphere of Earththe position of the constellations in space
What takes place as a light wave enters a denser medium?it is reflectedit is absorbedit is refractedit is compressed
Deforestation in the rainforest can lead to localized extinctions of populations of some organisms. Once an area is deforested, which is most likely to decrease and result in organisms' extinctions?the amount of annual rainfallcompetition between consumersthe energy available to producersdiversity of the resources in the habitat
Which of the following causes a ship’s iron anchor to sink to the ocean floor when it is released overboard?chemical forcesgravitymagnetismnuclear forces
In clear weather, a bright light can be seen for a long distance. In conditions of heavy fog, the visibility is greatly reduced. Which of the following explains the reduced visibility?Light is refracted by water vapor in the air.Light is scattered by water droplets in the air.Light is absorbed by water vapor near the ground.Light is reflected by water droplets on the ground.
When the pesticide DDT was first used, it killed nearly every mosquito it touched. Within a few years, however, many mosquitoes became resistant to DDT and survived. What enabled this to happen?meiosismigrationimmune responsesgene mutations
When air is heated, it will most likelyexpand and fall.expand and rise.condense and fall.condense and rise.
The wheels and gears of a machine are greased in order to decreasepotential energyefficiencyoutputfriction
A student learns that one year on Mercury is about 88 Earth days. This means it takes 88 Earth days for Mercury totravel in orbit around its moon.complete one rotation on its axis.switch orbits with the nearest planet.make one complete orbit around the Sun.
Two processes are involved in the formation of a sand dune. Which two processes best describe how a sand dune forms?wind erosion then depositionplate movement then depositionwind erosion then water erosionwater erosion then plate movement
When a student uses the equation, mass multiplied by change in temperature multiplied by specific heat, what is being calculated? q = m \times C \times \Delta Ta phase changestored energyheat convectionheat gain or heat loss
Which rock is most likely to contain fossil seashells?basaltgneissgranitelimestone
Which occurs as a result of Earth's tilt on its rotating axis?movement of the tidesprevalent or trade windsseasonal changes in the climatelight and dark changes of day and night
Planets remain in orbit around the Sun because ofgravity.friction.solar energy.centrifugal force.
Which cells help to destroy pathogens such as bacteria that enter the human body?red blood cellsliver cellswhite blood cellsbrain cells
Eye color in human beings is aninstinct.acquired trait.inherited trait.environmentally influenced trait.
If a species is no longer able to reproduce, it willadapt to its environmentbecome immune to diseasebecome extinctincrease its population
Which of these is hottest?The EarthMarsThe MoonThe Sun
In large industrial cities, the emissions from fossil fuels cause the atmosphere to change. Which process allows the atmosphere to change?increased inorganic matter in soilincreased use of fertilizers on cropsincreased buildup of greenhouse gasesincreased rainfall rates near power plants
Which is the most likely response of a human to an increase in temperature?increasing the amount of perspirationincreasing waste elimination from the bladdera reduction in the desire for liquidsa contraction in blood vessels in the skin
An organism's traits are largely determined by the genetic makeup of its parents. A mutation in which kinds of cells in a parent could cause a new trait to appear in the parent's offspring?sperm or eggegg or nervenerve or musclemuscle or sperm
Electricity to play your radio can be made using renewable or nonrenewable resources. Which of the following resources are renewable?wind and oilwind and sunlightnatural gas and oilnatural gas and coal
The action of turning off the water while brushing teeth is an example ofrecycling.adaptation.conservation.resourcefulness.
Which objects are the most useful for collecting data on the speed of a toy car?microscope, computer, rulerthermometer, calculator, magnetstopwatch, calculator, meter stickcamera, digital recorder, safety goggles
Some microorganisms cause human disease. Other microorganisms are used in making cheese, yogurt, and bread. Based on this information, the relationship between humans and microorganisms can bebeneficial, onlyharmful, onlybeneficial or harmful
Which of these objects is visible because it reflects light toward the eye?burning candleflashlight bulbglowing campfire logshiny metallic balloon
Which dog trait is a learned behavior?blinking its eyesscratching an itchpanting to cool offjumping to catch a ball
When an atom has a neutral charge, which particles within the atom have equal numbers?electrons and neutronsprotons and electronsneutrons and protonsions and neutrons
A paper bag is ripped into pieces. Which of these BEST describes the pieces of the bag?Stronger than the whole bagThicker than the whole bagSmaller than the whole bagDarker than the whole bag
A lizard most likely would be protected from its enemies if it has which characteristic?claws to catch preya long tail to climb treeseyes that can see far distancesskin color that matches its habitat
Copper is used in house wiring because it ismagnetic.an insulator.an electrical conductor.hard to bend into new shapes.
Which process causes light to bend and form a rainbow?frequencyresonancerefractionreflection
Sugar is composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Sugar is an example of which of the following?an atoma compoundan electrona mixture
The tendency of a stationary object to resist being put into motion is known asacceleration.inertia.weight.velocity.
One way that students can help conserve natural resources at school is byrecycling aluminum cans.emptying waste baskets.wearing warmer clothes.eating all of their lunch.
The Grand Canyon is an example oferosion.deposition.an earthquake.volcanic activity.
Humans cannot survive without clean, fresh water. Reservoirs of liquid water vary, but all water spends time as a gas in the atmosphere. What is the source of most of the water in the atmosphere?lakesoceansriversglaciers
When a frying pan is placed on an electric stove top, heat energy is transferred from the burner to the pan byconvection.radiation.conduction.insulation.
What happens when water flows over a rock for a long period of time?erosionfloodingbreakageevaporation
During winter, the white fur of an arctic fox blends in with the snow. This adaptation is calledhibernationmigrationcamouflagemovement
How has the invention of the personal computer helped people the most?by replacing paperby reducing pollutionby improving transportationby increasing communication
Humans depend on which natural resource from the environment?waterhouseselectricityroads
The danger posed to fish in an aquarium by an overpopulation of bacteria caused by an algal bloom is most likely adecrease in water temperature.reduction in oxygen levels.decrease in food supply.removal of minerals.
Natural processes shape the surface of Earth. Most canyons are formed by ___.iceplantssteady windsmoving water
What is the best way for a student to describe the results of an experiment?in a diagramin an oral reportin a written reportin a photo essay
Which of the following is a living component of a desert in California?low rainfallhot temperaturepolar bearhorned lizard
Scientists wonder how the Egyptian pyramids were built. They think that the huge blocks of stone may have been put into place by pushing them up a sloping pathway. The pathway is which type of simple machine?leverpulleyinclined planewheel and axle
Magnesium strips are long, thin strips that are gray and shiny. Which action will lead to a chemical change of magnesium strips?putting them in the freezerburning them with a candlecutting them into small piecesmixing them with pieces of copper
Which involves the greatest variety of cell types?a tissuean organan organ systeman organism
Snapping a rubber band most likely produces which type of energy?heatlightsoundelectrical
People can help keep a forest a good place for birds to live bydumping garbage in a small part of the forestbuilding a road through the middle of the forestburning dead trees to make smoke in the airpreventing too many trees from being cut down
Randall is picking lettuce from his garden for dinner. His mother told him to leave some leaves on each plant. Why is it important to leave some leaves on the plant?Leaves help the plant make food.Leaves help the plant absorb water.Leaves help the plant stand upright.Leaves help the plant make seeds.
A negatively-charged ion hasa heavier nucleus.a greater atomic mass.more electrons than protons.more electrons than neutrons.
Which statement explains what will most likely happen to the hydrosphere in an area where air temperatures increase?Earthquake intensity will decrease.Mountain formation will decrease.Rock weathering will increase.Evaporation will increase.
Which energy source is considered nonrenewable?oilmoving watersunlightbiomass
When buried sediments are subjected to pressure, the mineral grains are squeezed together. What is the result of this action?volcanoesearthquakesnew rock is formedlayers rise to the surface
What is the primary source of energy for organisms from a beach ecosystem?sandoxygenthe Sunthe ocean
Before rock can become soil, it must undergo certain processes. One process in the formation of soil involves plants. How can plants chemically change rocks into soil?They weather rocks with acid.They strip the rocks of minerals.They break rocks into small pieces.They increase the density of the rocks.
Which is the best way a science student can help to maintain laboratory equipment?perform investigations using only new materialsthrow away glass items after investigations are completeclean up all materials and workspaces after investigationseat in the laboratory only after investigations are complete
Which of the following statements best explains why stars appear to move across Earth's sky each night?Earth rotates on its axis.The stars orbit each other.Earth revolves around the Sun.The stars rotate with the Moon.
Researchers are developing new types of crop plants with desirable characteristics such as disease resistance and drought tolerance. Crossing plants so that the next generation will express desirable traits is best described asselective breeding.natural selection.genetic engineering.gene sequencing.
In May 2007, wildfires burned more than 350 square miles of habitat in Florida and Georgia. Intense fires like this one can temporarily remove nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in area soil. What most likely happens in the burned areas until organic decay replenishes the lost nutrients?Consumers take on the ecological role of producers.Only secondary consumers obtain the resources they need.The carrying capacity of the soil for plant growth is reduced.The remaining organisms in the area become more territorial.
Helen is preparing a presentation about objects in the solar system. She includes facts about the order of the planets and their distances from the Sun. Which statement could she include in an accurate presentation?Mars is closer to the Sun than Earth.Neptune is one light-year from the Sun.Jupiter is farther from the Sun than Uranus.Earth is one astronomical unit from the Sun.
Farmers in the 1800s used axes to clear trees from farmland. Now, farmers use chainsaws to clear the trees. How do chainsaws most likely help farmers?Farmers can cut different types of trees.Farmers can remove more trees in less time.Farmers can replant more trees in the fields.Farmers can produce more products from the trees.
What can a moving magnet in a coil of copper wire cause?an electric currentfriction on wheelsan increase in gravitya decrease in heat
A researcher determines a cell has a flexible cell wall composed of peptidoglycan. This observation narrows possible classifications of the cell to which taxonomic group?archaeabacteriafungiplants
A student conducts an investigation using mold spores. In one part of the investigation, he needs to closely examine a spore sample. Which piece of equipment does the student need to use to keep mold spores from entering his respiratory system?breathing masksafety gogglesrubber gloveslead smock
Vultures are scavengers that most likely help ecosystems by quickly consuming dead organisms andspeeding up the process of decay.taking nonliving matter from the environment.slowing the spread of disease.helping to distribute seeds.
What is the process called when an acid and a base combine to produce water and salt?neutralizationdilutiontitrationphysical reaction
Amylase is a chemical that decomposes starch into maltose and dextrin. Which best describes the role of amylase in the human body?as an inhibitor of insulin productionas an enzyme that aids in digestionas a catalyst for protein synthesisas a receptor of fatty acid chains
Sound waves can pass through all of these exceptair.steel.water.a vacuum.
Why is it important to repeat an experiment several times?to use up all the materialsto give all the students the chance to participateto collect more data to fit the hypothesisto determine if the results are similar
Which force causes a marble to sink to the bottom of a glass of water?gravityfrictionmagnetismelectricity
A mosquito is a type of flying insect that lays eggs in puddles or small pools of water. When larvae develop from eggs, the larvae come to the surface to get air through special breathing tubes. After one to two weeks, the larvae become pupae and then turn into adults. How would a dry summer affect a mosquito population?The mosquito larvae would take longer to become pupae.The adult mosquitoes would have fewer places to lay eggs.The adult mosquitoes would get fluids by feeding more often.The mosquito larvae would use their breathing tubes to live on land.
NASA's Kepler Mission has collected information about main-sequence stars with characteristics similar to the Sun. What is the most common color of these stars?bluewhiteredyellow
A fever is a response to a disease-causing agent infecting the body. Raising one's body temperature changes the shape of enzymes in the agent so it cannot reproduce. Which statement best describes a fever?A fever is an internal response to an external stimulus.A fever is an internal response to an internal stimulus.A fever is an external response to an external stimulus.A fever is an external response to an internal stimulus.
Two people are pushing a car. One person is pushing with a force of 450 N and the other person is pushing with a force of 300 N. What information is needed to determine the net force applied to the car by the people?the direction of the roadthe direction of the forcesthe weight of the two peoplethe weight of the automobile
A student proposes the rate of increase in a plant's mass will be proportional to the length of light exposure per day when all other variables are constant. How should this proposal be classified?as a hypothesisas a conclusionas a theoryas a statement
Approximately how many times will Earth rotate during one revolution around the Sun?1283651440
A shiny aluminum screen can be placed on the windshield of a parked car. This screen helps to keep the car cool because itreflects the sunlightabsorbs heatcauses evaporationconducts electricity
Which property of an object can be described as smooth?colorodorsizetexture
During photosynthesis, plants absorb light energy from the Sun and convert it into chemical energy in the form of glucose. Which compounds combine in the presence of sunlight to form glucose?carbon dioxide (CO2) and hydrogen (H2)oxygen (O2) and carbon dioxide (CO2)carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O)oxygen (O2) and water (H2O)
A researcher is viewing a cell that has cell walls. To best narrow down the taxonomic group from which the cell belongs, which question should a researcher ask?What is the composition of the cell walls?Is a cell membrane also present?Can any substances pass through the cell walls?Do the cell walls help the cell to survive?
Which of the following best explains what will occur when a population grows larger than the carrying capacity of its environment?The emigration rate will decrease.The competition rate will decrease.The birth rate will increase.The death rate will increase.
Oceans have many layers of sediments. These layers become compacted when they are buried under other layers of sediments. Which is most likely to happen to the deepest layers?They will be squeezed out onto deltas.They will recrystallize into new rock.They will become part of Earth's outer core.They will melt in magma chambers.
The first microscopes were built in the 1600s. Microscopes have improved since then, but still perform the same job. How do microscopes most help scientists?They make small objects easier to see.They make distant objects appear closer.They reduce the glare from shiny objects.The improve the brightness of dim objects.
What do plants take from the air that helps them make food?oxygennitrogencarbon dioxidehydrogen peroxide
When a person sees something, what carries the message from the eyes to the brain?arteriesglandsmusclesnervesveins
Which of the following is an abiotic factor that can influence the quantity of fish a pond can support?availability of plantsconcentration of bacteriaquality of waternumber of consumers
The islands in the mid-Pacific Ocean region were formed byland subsidence.deposition from currents.wind and water erosion.volcanic activity.
Which term identifies a single unit of hereditary information?egg cellsperm cellnucleusgene
A mother hen clucks loudly when danger is near and her chicks quickly gather around her. Which sense helps the chicks receive this warning about danger from their mother?smelltastesightsound
Newly hatched turtles are easy prey for other animals. What is an important ability turtles have for better survival of their offspring?to fight off predatorsto produce a toxin that makes them taste badto lay hundreds of eggs so a few will surviveto dig a hole and hide from predators
Mr. Mendoza's class studied different body systems. What is an important function of the circulatory system?providing structural support to musclescarrying oxygen to cellsgetting energy from foodsending messages to the brain
Which example shows a new substance being formed?a candle burninga shoelace being tieda pipe being cut in halfa block of ice melting
What do all mammals have in common that distinguishes them from birds?eyesfura braina heart
Grooves running down the sides of a riverbank are most likely caused bywind.rocks.leaves.rainwater.
Which of the following best describes a mineral?a solid natural material with a crystal structurea material that was once living but has decayeda liquid chemical used to make soil more fertilea nutrient produced by plants that other organisms need
Plankton are tiny ocean organisms. The role of one type of plankton is to use the energy from the Sun to produce food that other animals eat. Which organism has the same role in the ocean as this type of plankton?seaweedturtledolphincrab
How many times does the Moon rotate on its axis during a lunar month?onetwothreefour
Changes to abiotic factors in an environment can impact biotic factors. Which statement is the BEST example of this situation?Heavy rainfall increases soil erosion.Melting glaciers cause sea levels to rise.Cold temperatures cause rocks to weather.Drought conditions increase competition among consumers.
There are several different types of rock. Each type of rock is formed under different conditions. How are sedimentary rocks, such as shale and sandstone, formed?Particles are heated by the Sun.Particles are melted together by magma.Particles are compressed into layers.Particles are changed into liquids.
Which disease is correctly paired with the cause of the disease?athlete's foot - fungimalaria - virusesinfluenza - bacteriapneumonia - protists
Unequal distribution of the hormone auxin in plants helps to regulate the direction of plant growth. Which of the following is accomplished by plants in regulating the distribution of auxin?pollination of flowerstransportation of nutrientsdiscouraging predationresponding to the environment
Ten people became sick with the flu after attending a school dance. What is the scenario that could best explain how the people got sick?contact with environmental sourcescontact with an infected animalcontact with a contaminated objectcontact with an infected person
One way to protect against food poisoning is tocook food to proper temperatures.combine different types of food.store food in glass containers.defrost meat slowly on the counter.
Which statement is a MAJOR mistake in the experimental design?A control group was not used.The same type of pot and soil was used.Each plant received the same amount of water.Too much data will be collected in three weeks.
Which effect do rapidly cooling temperatures have on the water cycle?Water droplets evaporate into vapor.Water vapor condenses into droplets.Condensation evaporates into precipitation.Precipitation condenses into water droplets.
A researcher found shark fossils on top of a mountain. This evidence suggests which of the following about this region?It was once below a waterfall.It was once part of a riverbed.It was once covered by an ocean.It was once near a freshwater lake.
A student is measuring the distance a car travels down a ramp using yards. Which measurement is most similar in length when using the metric system of measurement?centimeterkilometermillimetermeter
A marble is dropped in a glass of water. Which force pulls the marble to the bottom of the glass?electricityfrictiongravitymagnetism
Which scientist formulated rules that describe the observable relationships of plant traits to the traits of the ancestor plants?Linus PaulingGregor MendelJames WatsonAlbert Einstein
The invention of the telescope allowed which of the following to take place?the discovery of cellsthe identification of weather patternsdetailed observation of planetscommunication between distant cities
Which instrument should a student use to measure exactly 10 milliliters (mL) of water?graduated cylinderpan balancerulerthermometer
A gas is heated and its temperature increases. What happens to the gas molecules?They get bigger.They move faster.They move slower.They increase in number.
Which tool is used to measure the diameter of a dime?rulerbeakerbalancecompass
A rainforest area is experiencing a severe drought. As a consequence, the insect population has decreased. What will the insect-eating birds most likely do as a result of the drought?stop searching for food until it begins to rainbegin reproducing to increase populationmove to a new area to find foodstart the process of hibernation
Which unit is used to indicate the amount of energy in food?ouncedegreecaloriegram
Wire was looped several times around an iron nail, and the wire's ends were connected to a battery. For which of these will this device most likely be used?to produce a heat sourceto demonstrate frictional forcesto create a magnetic fieldto generate a sound wave
Dust and ash entering the atmosphere as a result of volcanic eruptions can affect Earth'stidal activityorbital shapeweather and climaterotation and revolution
During which chemical process is energy absorbed?iron nails rustingcandles burningvegetables rottingplants photosynthesizing
When two nuclei are combined into one nucleus, there is a slight change in mass and the release of a large amount of energy. What is this process called?conversionreactionfissionfusion
The sound, light, and heat that a firecracker produces are originally stored as which type of energy?nuclear energychemical energyelectrical energymechanical energy
Vehicle exhaust contains a form of pollution called particulate matter. Technologies are being developed to reduce the amount of particulate matter in exhaust. A vehicle that produces less particulate matter would have the greatest impact on which aspect of human health?heart healthrespiratory healththe rate of birth defectsweight and physical fitness
Janet learns that Earth is tilted. Due to its tilt, some areas on the surface of Earth experience darkness for an entire day. Which plant process is affected most during this darkness?root growthreproductionphotosynthesiswater absorption
What types of cells are found only in organisms that reproduce sexually?blood cellsneuronsskin cellsgametes
Several dinosaur bones are discovered buried in volcanic ash. The type of dinosaur can best be identified byknowing the location where the fossils were found.establishing an inventory of bones collected.comparing to characteristics of known dinosaurs.knowing the absolute age of the fossils.
Stretching is considered an important step before engaging in sports. In an investigation to see whether stretching before physical exertion reduces sports injuries, who would the control group most likely be?athletes who stretch before working outnon-athletes who stretch before working outathletes who do not stretch before working outnon-athletes who do not stretch before working out
In the first half of this century, which technology allowed people, for the first time, to work IN the city but live OUTSIDE the city?airplanesautomobilestelephonestelevision
Most sedimentary rock is made from sediments of other rock. Which of these processes would the sediments most likely go through to form sedimentary rock?compaction and cementationfolding and recrystallizationmelting and solidifyingheating and pressure
Rocks and Earth and on the Moon are made of similar materials. What does this observation most likely suggest?Both the Moon and Earth split off from the Sun.Life must have existed on the Moon at one time.The Moon was probably formed from material from Earth.The whole solar system is made up of the same kinds of rocks.
In any ecosystem, organisms interact with biotic and abiotic parts of the environment. As a result of all of the interactions, the matter within the system isproduced when plants grow.recycled when organisms die.lost when animals and plants die.formed when new animals are born.
Data indicate that chemical pollutants contaminate 53% of the waterways that empty into the Chesapeake Bay. These chemical pollutants are found in the tissues of animals living in the bay. Which group of people who live away from the bay might be most affected by these chemical pollutants?people who walk near the baypeople who read books about the baypeople who consume fish from the baypeople who own boats docked in the bay
Which behavior can help animals establish a territory?A caribou herd migrates seasonally.A scent trail leads ants to a food source.A wolf pack howls to warn other wolves to stay away.A honeybee society divides the work between its members.
Arteries and veins are two important parts of the circulatory system. What is the relationship between arteries and veins?They work together to exchange gases.They work together to transport nutrients.They work independently to remove wastes.They work independently to relay messages.
Which function is a role of a feedback system?stimulation of appetiteidentification of genderdetermination of blood typeregulation of growth in the skeletal system
Which technique will researchers studying the inheritance patterns of various disorders most likely use?cladogramDNA fingerprintinggel electrophoresischromosomal analysis
If a lake is polluted, which organism would most likely accumulate the highest concentration of contaminants?bassminnowsaquatic plantsfish-eating birds
Which of these can only be found in a plant cell?a nucleusa vacuolea chloroplasta mitochondrion
The Milky Way Galaxy is visible as a bright region in the night sky. Modern telescopic observation has made it possible to discover that the brightness of the Milky Way Galaxy is due primarily to which structure?clouds of hot gaslarge numbers of starshigh energy compoundsextremely reflective ice particles
More sulfur dioxide is being added to the atmosphere. How will this most likely affect the hydrosphere?There will be a decrease in sea level.The acidity of the ocean will increase.There will be an increase in fresh water.The temperature of the oceans will decline.
Plants transform energy when they make their own food. Which type of energy is used by plants for making food?electricalheatlightmechanical
Dominic placed a caterpillar in a container with different kinds of leaves. Which information should he record to find out what food this caterpillar eats?the type of leaves the caterpillar has eatenthe amount of time for all the leaves to be eatenthe number of leaves that were put in the containerthe number of minutes the caterpillar spends eating
Which class of elements best conducts electricity?metalsnonmetalssemimetalsnoble (inert) gases
What are the products in the chemical reaction below? NaOH + HCl -> NaCl + H_{2}Osodium hydroxide and hydrogen chloridesodium chloride and watersodium, chlorine, hydrogen, and oxygensodium, chlorine, and water
Termites eat wood but cannot digest it. Protozoans live in the termites' stomachs and use enzymes to break down the wood. The digested wood provides nutrition for both the termites and the protozoans. What type of relationship is this?mutualismparasitismpredationcommensalism
In the Adirondack forests of New York, some trees have died. The change in the forest is thought to be related to air pollution and rain. Which abiotic factor most likely has been changed as a result of the pollution and rain which resulted in the death of the trees?a decrease in the amount of available oxygenan increase in the amount of sunlighta decrease in the pH of the soilan increase in soil nutrients
The first step in the construction of a building typically involvesclearing the land.setting the foundation.servicing the structure.installing utilities.
What biological concept was Mendel studying when he crossed pea plants many times over many generations?imbalance in ecosystemspredator-prey relationshipsdominant and recessive traitsmale and female genetic differences
The following represents a number displayed on a calculator. 1.454545 E3. Which of the following shows how a student should record this number in a laboratory report?(1.45)^31 5/111.45 x 10^31.45 x 3
In which process is nitrogen from the air put into a form that plants can use?nitrificationdenitrificationnitrogen saturationnitrogen fixation
The surface of the Moon is covered with craters. Most of these craters were formed byeruptions of active volcanoesthe impacts of many meteoroidsshifting rock on the Moon's surface ("moonquakes")tidal forces caused by the Earth and Sun
Which event would most likely occur if the number of nitrogen fixing bacteria were reduced within an ecosystem?plants would have more nitrates to take upplants and animals would decompose fasterhigh levels of ammonia would accumulate in the soilthe level of nitrogen gas in the atmosphere would increase
Census data show that the human population doubled from 2.65 billion in 1953 to 5.3 billion in 1990. If it continues to double at this rate, the human population could reach 10 billion by the year 2020. Which best explains how this rate of human growth can harm the environment on which humans depend?by gradually making up more available energyby using resources faster than they can be replacedby changing how matter cycles through an ecosystemby increasing the variety of ecosystems that are supported
Bats find their prey at night using one of their senses to detect echoes. What does the bat send out to find prey?odorslightsoundelectricity
Which two objects produce their own light?candle and moonmoon and mirrorsun and candlemirror and sun
Which example describes an organism taking in nutrients?a dog burying a bonea girl eating an applean insect crawling on a leafa boy planting tomatoes in a garden
In eukaryotic organisms, interaction between which organelles is most important for cell shape, tensile strength, and communication between cells?cytoskeleton and cell membranecytoplasm and Golgi apparatusnucleus and endoplasmic reticulumribosome and central vacuole
A radio station broadcasting across a large area is experiencing thunderstorms. How will the radio waves from the station be affected?wavelength will be increasedamplitude will be unchangedfrequency will be distortedspeed will be decreased
An electrical circuit can be used to break down water into hydrogen and oxygen. In this process, electrical energy produceskinetic energy.physical changes.chemical changes.potential energy.
Which method could be used to separate a solution of table salt and water?mixingsettlingfiltrationevaporation
Which is an example of light being reflected?taking a pictureusing a magnifying glasslooking into a mirrorusing eyeglasses
What is the MAJOR role of the Sun in the water cycle?It causes evaporation.It allows plants to grow.It provides heat for organisms.It transmits light.
Which activity is an example of a chemical change?dissolving table salt in waterhammering aluminum into thin sheetsmelting gold to make jewelryburning wood to produce ashes
A city has a temperature of 75 °F, with partly cloudy skies. Weather forecasters are predicting that the air pressure and temperature will drop during the day. Which type of weather is most likely for this area in the late afternoon?rainy.sunny.snowing.hailing.
In Maryland, most bears have thick, dark fur. Which statement best explains how dark fur helps bears survive in the forests of Maryland?Dark fur is lightweight.Dark fur scares enemies.Dark fur helps bears hide.Dark fur keeps bears cool.
Nicole was studying different ecosystems. She compared the number of plants living in a forest to those in a desert. Which factor best explains why more plants may survive in a forest?There is more rain in the forest.There is more oxygen in the forest.There is more sunlight in the forest.There is more competition in the forest.
A short plant with a thick, fleshy stem, extensive roots, and a short blooming period would most likely be found in which of the following environments?prairiedesertconiferous forestdeciduous forest
What happens when oil is placed in water?Some oil sinks below the surface.Oil droplets form in the water.The oil and water mix together.The oil floats on top of the water.
A decomposer is an organism thathunts and eats animalsmigrates for the winterbreaks down dead plants and animalsuses water and sunlight to make food
Which of the following correctly orders part of a fish's respiratory system from the least complex to most complex?cells -> gills -> tissuescells -> tissues -> gillsgills -> tissues -> cellstissues -> gills -> cells
Most birds sit on their eggs until they hatch. Which of these is the most important reason why birds sit on their eggs?to keep the eggs inside the nestto keep the eggs warmto protect the eggs from the windto protect the eggs from the rain
A lab technician places a colony of bacterial cells in a nutrient-rich growth medium. Which event is the technician most likely to observe with a microscope?cell divisioncellular respirationheat productionfood storage
When sound waves with large amplitude are compared to sound waves with small amplitude, which of the following is true?Sound waves with large amplitudes have less energy and sound quieter.Sound waves with large amplitudes have more energy and sound louder.Sound waves with large amplitudes have the same energy and sound quieter.Sound waves with large amplitudes have the same energy and sound louder.
Vinegar and water are placed in a container and stirred. What is formed when they are mixed?gassolidsolutioncompound
Which of the following best describes the climate of an area?the high temperature and wind speed for six monthsthe high temperature and wind speed each day for one yearthe temperature and precipitation every hour for one daythe average temperature and total precipitation each month for ten years
Salt and pepper are placed together in a container. When the container is shaken, the salt and pepper become aliquid.mixture.solution.suspension.
All natural resources on Earth are either renewable or nonrenewable. Whether a resource is renewable or nonrenewable depends on how fast or slow the resource is replaced. If the resource is used faster than it is replaced, then the resource will, in time, disappear. Which statement describes the use of a renewable natural resource?A home burns natural gas for heat.A city burns coal to generate electricity.A farmer plants different types of crops to protect the soil.A construction crew builds a road from rock, sand, and gravel.
Which of the following statements best explains why earthquakes occur more frequently in California than in Massachusetts?The rock found in California is igneous, but the rock found in Massachusetts is sedimentary.California is located on the boundary of two crustal plates, but Massachusetts is not.The rock under California is soft, but the rock under Massachusetts is hard.California is located on a continental plate, but Massachusetts is not.
Which of these describes a chemical change?water freezingpaper burningwater becoming steampaper being torn
A large tree was cut down with a saw. What is the best way to estimate the age of this tree?measure the height of the treemeasure the thickness of the barkcount the number of rings in the trunkcount the branches growing from the trunk
From smallest to largest, the levels of organization in living things aretissues, cells, organs, organ systems.tissues, cells, organ systems, organs.cells, tissues, organs, organ systems.cells, tissues, organ systems, organs.
Which object is nonliving?bearbicyclebirdbutterfly
What happens when oil and water are mixed?The mixture changes color.The water becomes cloudy.The oil dissolves in the water.The oil and water remain separate.
Students measure the time for toy cars of different masses to roll down a hill. Which of the following units should the students use to measure time?centimetersgramsmillilitersseconds
A homeowner wants to use a renewable resource to heat the home. Which resource would be the best to use?coalgasoilsolar
Which of the following animal features most helps the animal move around in its habitat?A bird's sharp beakA cow's tailA sea turtle's flippersA black bear's fur
A student observes cells in an object by using a microscope. The student thinks that the object was part of a living thing. Which statement explains why cell theory can be used to support the student's thinking?Cell theory was developed using a microscope.Cell theory was developed to study living things.Cell theory states that all living things are made of cells.Cell theory states that scientists may classify things as living or nonliving.
A researcher observes that an organism placed in a glass container filled with water moves away when a penlight is focused on the container. The researcher concludes that the organism is light sensitive. Which other explanation for the organism's response to the light is most possible?The organism avoids radio waves.The organism avoids gamma rays.The organism moves away from vibrations.The organism moves away from heat sources.
Which behavior is an example of an animal adapting to a change in the environment?a squirrel climbing a treea rabbit feeding its younga frog eating an insecta bird migrating south
Mitochondria are cell organelles that play a large role in energy processes within the body. Which cells are most likely to have a greater amount of mitochondria?skinbonebloodmuscle
Which would be the best method to use to dispose of cardboard boxes not utilized by a local grocery store?burn them once a monthsend them to be dumped in a remote areahave them recycled for future paper productsput them into a dumpster with the rest of the trash
Which item is used for protection from chemical splashing?compasshand lensmicroscopesafety goggles
Which processes change magma into igneous rock?cooling and crystallizationcompaction and cementationheat and pressureweathering and erosion
Sophie investigates the water supply at her school and the things that affect it. Which action is a direct observation?tasting water from a water fountainreading water test resultsstudying the rules for purifying waterinvestigating causes of water pollution
Two identical books are on opposite ends of a table. Which of these would increase the gravitational force exerted between the two books?decrease the distance between the booksdecrease the mass of the booksdecrease the mass of the tabledecrease the temperature in the room
When a guitar string is plucked, sound is produced bythe size of the guitar.the metal on the guitar.the wood on the guitar.the vibrations of the string.
What is the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis?absorbing oxygenreflecting green lightabsorbing light energyblocking carbon dioxide
Which tool should a student use to compare the masses of two small rocks?balancehand lensrulermeasuring cup
Which is an example of a chemical reaction?Vinegar added to baking soda forms a gas.Water evaporates into air.Sugar dissolves in water.Corn kernels are crushed to form flour.
Which type of evidence would a geologist need to support plate tectonic theory?plant fossils that are similar in sizethe weathering and erosion of coastlinesnew crust formed by the sea floor spreadingrocks with different physical appearances
An example of a learned trait isbeing able to readbeing able to breathehaving a scarhaving brown eyes
Angelo wants to know if the volume of water changes when it freezes. He measures the volume of water in its liquid state and then freezes it. Which tool did Angelo most likely use to measure the volume of the water?a microscopea thermometera balance scalea graduated cylinder
In order for a glider to fly, its weight must be opposed bylift.drag.gravity.friction.
Why does the leaf of a plant look green?Because it absorbs green lightBecause it reflects green lightBecause it absorbs only yellow and blue lightBecause it reflects a mixture of yellow and blue light
Which statement best describes the nature of sound?Sound travels fastest in air.Sound travels faster than light.Sound travels as longitudinal waves.Sound travels as transverse waves.
Which of these provides most of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere?coral reefsrainforest plantsocean phytoplanktoncontinental grasslands
A solution of lead (II) nitrate reacts with a solution of sodium iodide to produce a yellow solid of lead (II) iodide and aqueous sodium nitrate. Which of these illustrates the reaction?Pb(NO_{3})_{2}(aq) + 2NaI(aq) -> PbI_{2}(s) + 2NaNO_{3}(aq)L_{2}N(aq) + SI(aq) -> L_{2}I(s) + SN(aq)Pb_{2}N(aq) + NaI(aq) -> Pb_{2}I(s) NaN(aq)Fe(NO_{3})_{2}(aq) + 2NaI(aq) -> FeI_{2} + 2NaNO_{3}(aq)
A meteoroid becomes a meteorite when itimpacts the surface of a planet.encounters the atmosphere of a planet.makes a complete orbit around a planet.starts to burn up in the atmosphere of a planet.
Which force causes rocks to roll downhill?gravityfrictionerosionmagnetism
Infectious diseases are caused byallergiesvitamin deficiencieschemical spillsmicroorganisms
A water wave that occurs in an ocean is an example of which type of wave?electromagneticgravitationaltransverseseismic
Which of the following is an example of how insects are beneficial to humans?Insects can spread diseases.Insects have short life spans.Insects pollinate flowering plants.Insects sometimes eat poisonous plants.
In a closed system, what happens to the total energy of the system as energy conversions take place?It increases.It decreases.It remains constant.It is transferred out of the system.
Which of these organisms is a producer in a marine ecosystem?fishgullalgaeworm
Which of the following describes a reason why companies irradiate some fruits and vegetables before they are sold to the public?to improve the flavors by increasing the sugar contentto speed up the ripening of produce picked too earlyto partially cook the produce before canning or freezingto extend the shelf life by killing existing microorganisms
A glacier is a slow moving river of ice. How does a glacier help create soil?It scrapes small particles off large rocks.It carries plants down mountains and to oceans.It melts and becomes part of streams and rivers.It freezes small particles of dirt to form large rocks.
During winter months, Amina sometimes notices ice covering the hoods of parked cars. Once the engine of the car runs for a while, the ice on the hood begins to melt. What form of energy is released from the car engine to melt the ice?chemicalelectricalheatlight
A student notices dogs have more fleas in the summer than in the winter. Based on these observations, which is the most logical question for the student to investigate?How does wind affect the amount of fleas on dogs?How does diet affect the amount of fleas on dogs?How does rain affect the amount of fleas on dogs?How does temperature affect the amount of fleas on dogs?
According to the periodic table, all of the following are metals exceptsodiumzincfluorinecalcium
A squid is an animal that lives in the ocean. It pumps a stream of water out of its body, causing it to move rapidly. Which of the following mechanical systems moves in a way most similar to the squid?a busa helicoptera rocketa train
When the wax from a candle drips, the wax has reachedits boiling point.its melting point.a chemical change.a physical change.
In the morning, students observed puddles of water all over the playground. What would best explain why the playground was dry in the afternoon?Animals drank the water.The wind stopped blowing.Someone dried the puddles.The water evaporated during the day.
Many areas of Massachusetts have small deep ponds called kettle ponds. Which of the following best explains the formation of these ponds?avalanchewind erosionglacial depressionsediment deposition
What relationship exists between a dog and its fleas?commensalismgradualismmutualismparasitism
Which of the following could limit the supply of a renewable resource?recycling aluminum canscutting down trees in forestsmining minerals such as goldconserving freshwater resources
Which statement best describes the energy transformations that occur when a candle burns?Heat energy from the wax is converted into chemical and light energy.Heat energy from the air is converted into mechanical and light energy.Chemical energy from the wax is converted into light and heat energy.Chemical energy from the air is converted into mechanical and light energy.
Pesticides and fertilizers can help farmers to produce more crops. However, overuse of these chemicals can result inecological successionmaterial recyclingenvironmental pollutionselective breeding
What type of energy travels through the body of a microscope that allows the specimen to be seen by a student?heatsolarlightelectrical
A powder made up of both white specks and black specks is likely to bea solutiona pure compounda mixturean element
In the past, wild hogs called "javelinas" were seen only in the southern part of New Mexico. Now, javelinas are seen in areas 100 miles further north. What is the most likely cause of this expansion?Javelinas are reproducing less frequently.Environmental conditions have changed.The javelina's genetic traits have mutated.Nutritional requirements of javelinas have changed.
Which is the best example of a pure substance?peanutsmilkgoldair
Which tool would best help a person observe the parts of a plant cell?hand lenstelescopebinocularsmicroscope
The energy stored in the bonds of a glucose molecule during photosynthesis is in what form?chemicalelectricalkineticlight
What happens to water molecules during the boiling process?They move faster and move farther apart as they absorb heat.They move faster and remain close together as they absorb heat.They move more slowly but move farther apart as they lose heat.They move faster and move farther apart as they lose heat.
Evidence suggests that there is a relationship between ancient dinosaurs and modern birds. Through time, each occurrence of a new trait most likely resulted from which of the following?mutation of geneshybridization of speciesextinction of populationsalteration of the environment
Which of the following can cause erosion?falling leavesflowing watergrowing grassrising temperatures
Living things are classified as producers or consumers according totheir speed of movementthe size of their communitieshow they obtain foodhow they reproduce
A hydrologist studies the location, movement, and quality of water. A hydrologist recognizes the importance that water exists as ___.a solid, a liquid, and a gas (vapor)a solid and a liquida solid and a gas (vapor)a solid only
Which of these can be recycled in an attempt to conserve resources?gasolinesunlightaluminumnatural gas
This in turn causes the average temperature on Earth to rise. Which of the following observations supports that theory?The summer of 1998 was one of the hottest summer seasons on record.Carbon dioxide gas from cars and industry is a product of burning that produces heat.Carbon dioxide in the upper atmosphere absorbs and re-emits heat radiated from Earth's surface.Radiation on Earth's surface is increasing because of a hole in the ozone layers.
Which of these can be mined from Earth and used as an energy source?CoalGravelGraniteLimestone
Which tool is used to determine how long it takes warm water to melt an ice cube?a scalea stopwatcha calculatora thermometer
Two scientists doing the same experiment got different results. Which would be the best way to figure out which result might be correct?A group of scientists should argue about the results.The two scientists should do different experiments.More scientists should do the experiment.A group of scientists should vote.
A lipid bilayer allows certain molecules to pass through and blocks other molecules. Which structure is most often protected by a lipid bilayer?cellorgantissuesystem
Traits are transferred from generation to generation through thesperm onlyegg onlysperm and the eggtestes
Many scientists theorize that global warming will melt the polar ice caps. What would most likely happen if the polar ice caps melted?Ocean levels would increase.Human population would increase.Vegetation in water would decrease.Global precipitation would decrease.
Which of the following groups of organisms uses sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into sugar and oxygen?carnivoresdecomposersherbivoresproducers
What is the first step in designing a product?model a solutioncommunicate the solutionidentify the need or wantbuild a prototype
Solids that are combined together and maintain their physical properties are best labeled as asolute.mixture.solvent.compound.
A group of vertebrates has lungs, a body covered with scales, internal fertilization, and amniotic eggs. Which group of vertebrates does this describe?amphibiansbirdsmammalsreptiles
The brain, spinal cord, and nerves are organs that perform which primary function?supporting the body and enabling it to movetransporting oxygen, wastes, and nutrients throughout the bodyproducing male and female gametesconducting messages to coordinate body functions
Mammals must eliminate waste products that their bodies produce. Which organ helps mammals eliminate bodily waste?appendixkidneypancreasstomach
A pot is heated on a stove. Which process causes the metal handle of the pot to also become hot?combustionconvectionradiationconduction
In making a pizza, which process involves a chemical change?mixing spices for the sauceslicing pepperoni for the toppingspreading cheese on the pizzabaking the dough to form the crust
Base your answers on the information below. One hot, summer day it rained very heavily. After the rain, a plastic pan on a picnic table had 2 cm of rainwater in it. Four hours later, all the rainwater in the pan was gone. Which process caused the rainwater in the pan to disappear as it sat outside in the hot air?condensationevaporationprecipitationerosion
Which process must occur for clouds to form?erosionconductioncondensationprecipitation
In 1918, an outbreak of influenza infected 500,000 people all over the world. Tens of millions of those infected died. In 1994, an outbreak of pneumonic plague spread quickly through the city of Surat in India, killing 52 people. Which statement best describes the two events?Both outbreaks were pandemics.Both outbreaks were epidemics.The influenza outbreak was a pandemic. The plague outbreak was an epidemic.The influenza outbreak was an epidemic. The plague outbreak was a pandemic.
On the periodic table, the elements in group 18 (8A) (helium, neon, argon, etc.) are grouped together becausethey are lighter than air.they have full outer electron shells.they have excess electrons to share.they easily react with other elements.
Which of the following is a consumer?grainrabbitvegetabletree
Which statement explains why light from the Sun can warm up water in a glass?Light travels very fast.Light travels in straight lines.Water reflects light energy.Water absorbs light energy.
Which characteristic is an example of learned behavior?a bear hibernating in the wintera spider spinning a web in a treea butterfly migrating to the southa dog scratching at a door to go out
Which of these is a negative effect associated with some types of new technology?increased worker productivityfaster diagnosis of medical problemsless time required to find informationdecreased physical activity
What is the main source of energy for the water cycle?electricityerosiongravitysunlight
Sharpening a pencil and tearing paper are examples of physical changes. Which statement describes why these are physical changes?There is a change in how the objects are used.There is a change in the appearance of the objects.There is a change in the materials from which the objects are made.There is a change in both the appearance of the objects and the materials from which they are made.
Air in the atmosphere is heated unevenly by the sun, causingwind patterns.cloud formation.volcanic activity.water condensation.
Which sense is used to determine an object's texture?hearingsmelltastetouch
Which statement describes a method of sexual reproduction that occurs in plants?Stem cuttings are placed in water and grow roots.Seeds are produced from the flower of the plant.Underground stems from a plant grow into new plants.A leaf falls to the soil, develops roots, and grows.
Campers shouted toward a canyon wall. What characteristic of sound best explains why the campers heard an echo?Sound waves traveled slowly down the canyon.Sound waves were absorbed by the canyon wall.Sound waves reflected off the canyon wall.Sound waves were refracted around the canyon.
A recent scientific study funded by a medical corporation concluded that its product is not as harmful as consumers have reported. Identify a possible problem with this study.Corporate scientists have less training than other scientists.The results of the study may be influenced by bias.Privately funded science is not verified by other scientists.The study cannot be repeated with the same results.
Nerve cells transmitting messages to the body best demonstrate which primary function?the transfer of energythe exchange of gasesthe elimination of wastethe absorption of nutrients
A drinking water reservoir for a small town develops a blue-green algae bloom. The town hires a company to eliminate the problem. Which of the following should the company investigate first as a likely source of the problem?a pit where granite is ground up into gravela neighborhood where lawn chemicals are useda junkyard where old cars are salvaged for partsa grain elevator where corn and soybeans are stored
What travels through the stem of a plant?water and foodfood and nectarnectar and soilsoil and water
Which of these is an inherited behavior?a seal balancing a balla dog getting the newspapera spider spinning a weban ape using sign language
In 1987, a supernova was detected in the Large Magellanic Cloud galaxy, which is approximately 169,000 light years from Earth. Which event produces a supernova?the explosion of a massive starthe birth of a main-sequence starthe collapse of a medium-sized starthe collision of one star with another
Extinction of a species is most likely to occur as a result ofevolutionmigrationselective breedingenvironmental changes
When water vapor rises and cools, the liquid water in the air comes together formingwind.clouds.lightning.tornadoes.
Which of the following allows materials to enter and leave a cell?cell wallmitochondriavacuolecell membrane
Sandy and Keith plan to move a 6-kilogram block. If they wanted to calculate the mechanical energy required to move the block, what units would they use to report their answer?jouleskilowattskilometersvolts
DNA stores the genetic instructions transferred from one generation to the next. What is DNA?a moleculea membranea cell nucleusa spiral-shaped cell
Which list is correctly ordered from smallest to largest?Biosphere, organism, ecosystem, populationCommunity, organism, ecosystem, biosphereOrganism, population, community, ecosystemPopulation, ecosystem, community, biosphere
Which of the following has the greatest effect on the ability of soil to hold water?the age of the soil particlesthe size of the soil particlesthe color of the soil particlesthe luster of the soil particles
The Water Quality Act of 1987 required the development of standards that would prevent toxic pollutants from reaching dangerous levels in bodies of water. This act affected the amounts of toxic chemicals that could be discharged into bodies of water. Which of the following would have been most regulated by this act?feed lotsprivate homespaper millsgrocery stores
Which element is necessary for the formation of coal?crushed rocksflowing waterdead animalsdecaying vegetation
Some ancient Greeks tried to discover the laws of the universe through thought and logic. Which part of the scientific process were these scientists missing?analysisexperimentconclusionobservation
Which best describes a characteristic of the jet stream?It forms a boundary between a cold air mass and a warm air mass.It creates the high winds around the eye of a hurricane.It forces the hot air along the equator to rise to areas in North America.It causes high pressure air masses to rotate clockwise.
Single-celled organisms can reproduce and create cells exactly like themselves without combining genes from two different parent cells. When they do this, they use a type ofasexual reproduction.gamete formation.natural selection.sexual reproduction.
Most stars are similar to each other inbrightness.composition.diameter.temperature.
Which BEST explains why green marine algae are most often restricted to the top 100 meters of the ocean?They have no roots to anchor them to the ocean floor.They can live only where there is light.The pressure is too great for them to survive below 100 meters.If the algae lived below 100 meters they would be eaten by animals.
Which of these locations in the solar system contains the most asteroids?the surface of the Sunthe ring system of Saturnbetween Mars and Jupiterbetween Mercury and Venus
The body is able to detect pressure on its surface by which direct means?releasing of hormones in skinchanging in volume of fat and muscle cellssignaling by sensory neuronschanging of voltage in interneurons
Which of these is an organism that is unicellular?virusamoebamushroomant
Mark wants to make lemonade for his friends. He uses water, lemon juice, and sugar. Which of these best describes the lemonade?a mixturea metalan elementa compound
Sandra puts some pill bugs into an open box. She covers half the box with a piece of cardboard. She then places the box outside on a summer day, and all the pill bugs move under the cardboard. The pill bugs are most likely responding to which of the following?air pressurebright lightwindfog
During science class, students combined 1 kg of iron filings with 1 kg of sand to create a mixture. Which of the following methods would be best for separating the iron filings from the sand?Stir the mixture into hot water to dissolve the sand.Strain the mixture through a paper filter to collect the sand.Drag a magnet through the mixture to attract the iron filings.Shake the mixture to cause the iron filings to settle to the bottom.
Which is the thickest layer of Earth?crustinner coremantleouter core
Wind can cause erosion that changes the surface of the Earth. Wind erosion can have negative effects on the environment by removing soil and polluting the air during dust storms. Which of the following land forms are created by wind erosion?arches and faultssand dunes and archesmeanders and morainesmoraines and sand dunes
Deer eat different types of plants in an ecosystem. Which method would best show the percentages of the plant types in the deer diet?pie chartbar graphline graphscatterplot
How does a human body get energy?Sunlight on the skin produces energy.Water provides the majority of energy.Food and oxygen combine to deliver energy.Sleep provides energy stored at night for the next day.
Some birds fly south before winter each year. This is an example ofmigrationhibernationgerminationevaporation
Which system supports the body, protects internal organs, and makes blood cells?muscular systemcirculatory systemnervous systemskeletal system
The smallest particle of an element isan atom.a mixture.a molecule.a compound.
A student is writing a report on volcanoes. What should the student include to best help explain how a volcano works?a photograph of an active volcanoa map showing the location of a volcanoa table of famous volcanoes and last known eruptionsa diagram showing the structure of a volcano
Base your answer on the information below and on your knowledge of science. A baseball strikes the roof of a car and dents it. The paint on the roof begins to crack and chip, exposing the metal. The exposed metal on the roof rusts, eventually causing a small hole in the roof. Which event is a chemical change?The baseball strikes the roof.The roof of the car dents.The paint cracks and chips.The exposed metal rusts.
Which energy resource is renewable?fuel oilnatural gaswindcoal
Which energy conversion process occurs whenever coal is burned?mechanical to electricalmechanical to thermalchemical to electricalchemical to thermal
Claudia's teacher places a photograph of an organism on the board. He asks Claudia to determine if the organism is a plant or an animal. The answer to which question will best help Claudia determine if the organism is a plant or an animal?Does the organism have cells?Does the organism reproduce?Does the organism live in the forest?Does the organism make its own food?
Based on analysis of deep ice cores from the Arctic, scientists theorize that early humans caused air pollution. These scientists can make sure their data is correct byanalyzing only melted ice cores.analyzing more than one ice core.comparing their data to the expected results.comparing their data to modern pollution levels.
When a volcano erupts, dust and ash are blown into the atmosphere. The eruption directly reduces the transfer of energy fromthe ground to bacteria.the Sun to plants.plants to animals.animals to air.
Which change would most likely cause deer to die or leave a woodland?a forest firea rainstorma snow storma sinkhole
A student observes a glowing band across the night sky. This glowing band is most likelyorbiting planets in the solar system.a partial view of the Milky Way galaxy.an asteroid orbiting the Sun.light from stars in a distant galaxy.
What is the smallest unit of an element that still has the properties of that element?an atoma compoundan electrona molecule
The longitude of a location determines which time zone it is in. Different time zones are the result ofEarth's rotationEarth's revolutionthe Moon's rotationthe Moon's revolution
Which of these structures form when materials are deposited, buried, and cemented?intrusive structuresmetamorphic rocksvolcanic mountainssedimentary rocks
Earth is made of different layers that have varying characteristics. Which is the thickest layer?the mantlethe inner corethe outer corethe crust
Which are examples of inherited traits?specific beliefsfingerprintsmemoriesnose shape
An object has a weight of 10 kg on the surface of Earth. If the same object were transported to the surface of Mars, the object would have a weight of 3.8 kg. Which best explains why the weight of the object changed when transported from Earth to Mars?The density of the object is greater on Earth than it is on Mars.The volume of the object is greater on Earth than it is on Mars.Gravitational force is greater on Earth than it is on Mars.Atmospheric pressure is less on Earth than it is on Mars.
Which characteristic can a puppy inherit from its parents?muddy pawsspotted furbroken footscar on face
According to Darwin's theory of evolution, the variations among finches that he observed in the Galapagos Islands resulted fromtransmission of acquired characteristics.use or disuse of their beaks.natural mutagens.natural selection.
Jennifer has collected rocks while hiking. As she attempts to classify her rocks, which will she put in the pile of sedimentary rocks?Black-and-gray crystalline rocksShiny rocks with smooth texturesRocks with visible pieces of shells in themRocks with small interlocking crystals in them
Which form of energy is found in food?chemicalelectricalsoundmechanical
The Sun is a medium-sized star and is expected to continue to perform nuclear fusion for five billion years. What is most likely to be the final stage of the Sun?supernovasupergiantneutron starwhite dwarf
Which statement is the best description of the Milky Way galaxy?a collection of gases held together by inertiaa group of planets revolving around a single stara collection of stars and gases with the Sun as its centera group of stars, dust, and planets held together by gravity
When specific hormones are present in the blood of a hen, an egg is released from an ovary. Which two systems are involved with the release of an egg?immune and digestive systemsdigestive and endocrine systemsreproductive and immune systemsendocrine and reproductive systems
Fossil records indicate that Earth was first inhabited by bacteria-like organisms. These organismswere single-celled.had organ systems.were multi-cellular.had small appendages.
Onions can reproduce from bulbs. One parent bulb generates daughter bulbs with duplicate genetic information. Which is the most likely advantage of this kind of reproduction?Population size remains constant.Beneficial mutations are inevitable.Genetic variation is maximized.Large quantities of individuals can be produced rapidly.
Which action involving a pulley system requires the least amount of force?using several pulleys together instead of a single pulleyusing a fixed pulley instead of a moveable pulleypulling a long rope instead of a short ropepulling a rope up instead of down
In which environment would a white rabbit be best protected from predators?a shady foresta snowy fielda grassy lawna muddy riverbank
Which form of energy is needed to change water from a liquid to a gas?heatmechanicalchemicalsound
Which of these is a function of a leaf?Carrying nutrients throughout the plantConverting solar energy into sugarCreating shade for the plantAbsorbing water from the ground
Which of these is most likely to be spread when two people drink from the same water bottle?asthmamalariastrep throathay fever
The sum of all chemical reactions in the human body is known asfeedbackmetabolismdynamic equilibriumbiological adaptation
The water contained in a geyser system gains energy from the underground material surrounding it. The water molecules gain kinetic energy and this results in an increase in the pressure of the water. Eventually the geyser erupts and expels water into the air above ground. Which of the following types of energy is the source for the initial energy gain of the water?electricalmagneticmechanicalthermal
In a laboratory activity, four different types of rock were placed in identical acid solutions for one week. Each sample was then measured to see if any of the rock mass was dissolved by the acid solution. Which is the dependent (responding) variable in this activity?the mass of each rockthe type of rock testedthe length of time of the testthe amount of dissolved rock
Which cell structure carries out a function for a cell that is similar to the function that bark carries out for a tree?cell wallnucleuschloroplastmitochondrion
The number of squirrels in a certain ecosystem changes over time. These changes can be represented as a number of connected data points. Which method would a student most likely use to show this information?pie chartline graphpictogramdata table
Pedro shook a can of soda. When the soda was opened, foam and soda burst from the can. Which statement best explains what happened?A new substance was formed.The gas pressure was released from the can.The sugar in the soda turned into a gas.The can absorbed heat from the air.
Where is most of Earth's water located?glacierslakesoceansrivers
Investigations were performed to test several methods of keeping petals from falling off flowers that had been cut. Which is the most likely reason for this investigation?to test a hypothesisto form a theoryto produce a scientific paperto change previous results
Two seismographs are placed 500 km from an active fault line, one on each side of the active fault line. During an earthquake, what most likely accounts for the different readings on the seismographs?the pull of gravity on the wavesthe interaction of light with wavesthe differences in the strength of the waves' originsthe different media through which the waves travel
Scientists dig in a dry area at the bottom of a mountain range. Fossilized shells of freshwater mussels are found in the area. Which is a likely conclusion that scientists will draw based on this evidence?Rivers once flowed through the area.Volcanoes were once active in the area.The ocean shoreline once reached this area.Floods were a common occurrence in this area.
An apple appears red when struck by white light. This appearance is because the red light is reflected and the other colors are absorbed. What color will this apple appear to be when struck by blue light?blackblueredwhite
In New York State, an observer will usually see the Sun rise in thenorthsoutheastwest
Burning coal and natural gas are ways to produce electricity. Both coal and natural gas are nonrenewable resources. Which is an example of producing electricity using a renewable source of energy?using food pieces to make compostgliding a boat through the water using sailsputting an energy-saving lightbulb in a lampheating a home with energy collected by solar panels
When liquid water freezes, it forms ice. What is the physical state of an ice cube?gassolidliquidplasma
A student uses a hand lens to observe which of these objects?a mountainthe Moonan insectbacteria
Which type of rock would most likely contain a fossil?metamorphic rocksedimentary rockigneous rockmolten rock
Some events on Earth happen instantly while others take thousands of years to occur. Which process takes the longest time to complete?rivers rising due to storms and floodsevaporation of water from the leaves of a plantweathering of a rock to form small rocks and sandmovement of small pieces of rock by flowing water
Where do many of the basic life functions take place in organisms?braincellsheartnerves
Which physical structure would best help a bear to survive a winter in New York State?big earsblack nosethick furbrown eyes
What is made when sugar is dissolved in water?a colloida solutiona suspensionan evaporation
Gasoline for cars is produced from fossil fuels. Using gasoline can most likely lead to which environmental problem?soil erosionwater pollutionwildlife extinctionglobal warming
Which of the following is a cause of the ocean levels periodically rising and then falling?the slight tilt of the Moonthe force of gravity from the Moonthe convection within Earth's mantlethe revolution of Earth around the Sun
A scientist is searching for areas where new solar systems might form. What feature is the scientist looking for?a star similar to our Suna cloud of dust and gasan oxygen-rich atmospherea gravitational acceleration of 9.8 m/sec2
About how often is a full moon observed from Earth's surface?each weekonce a monthevery two weeksonce each leap year
When animals use energy, they producenitrogeniron sulfideoxygencarbon dioxide
Which would provide evidence of seafloor spreading?higher levels of salinity in the ocean waterstronger currents at the surface of the oceancooled magma found on the edge of the platesgreater reproduction levels for organisms at the bottom of the ocean
Mitosis occurs in living things when a cell divides to produce two cells. Compared to the original cell, how many chromosomes are in each of the resulting cells?half as manythe same numbertwice as manyan unpredictable number
Which organ directly works to protect the human body from disease?heartkidneypancreasskin
Steven went to a farm and picked a bright red tomato from a broken branch on the plant. The tomato had a rotten spot with a worm inside of it. Instead of eating the tomato, Steven decided to plant the seeds and grow new tomato plants. Which characteristic of the tomato plant is inherited and could change over several generations?color of the skinsize of rotten spotslength of worms insidenumber of broken branches
Many leaves appear green because the leavesresist green light.bend all colors except green.reflect green light.reflect all colors except green.
Which of these is the best definition of heredity?the transfer of learning from one generation to the nextthe transfer of visible features from one generation to the nextthe passage of dominant genes from one generation to the nextthe passage of genetic information from one generation to the next
Which of the following describes how a microwave oven heats food?The oven's interior reflects heat onto the food.The oven's interior, like a lens, focuses heat onto the food.Water molecules in the food reflect energy from microwave radiation.Water molecules in the food absorb the energy of microwave radiation.
Which three systems of the human body function together to move and control body parts?nervous, skeletal, and muscularmuscular, endocrine, and excretorydigestive, excretory, and reproductivecirculatory, endocrine, and respiratory
Astronomers have found evidence for the existence of a super-massive black hole in the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. What is thought to cause black holes to form?the death of a low-mass starthe gravity of a large nebulathe collapse of a high-mass starthe combining of material from planets
A research team wanted to produce a smaller variety of German shepherd dogs. They mated the smallest dogs from different litters for several generations. This is an example of which concept?extinctionmutationselective breedingnatural selection
A class learns about weather. The students in the class measure the outside air temperature at the same time each day. Which way of measuring the temperature would provide the most accurate data?taking the measurement in the shadeplacing the thermometer on the groundtaking a measurement using a different tool each dayrecording the measurements from three thermometers
Earth's magnetosphere is not uniformly shaped. It is compressed on the side facing the Sun and has a long tail extending away from the Sun. Which phenomenon is responsible for this shape?centripetal force of Earth's rotationgravitational attraction between Earth and the Sunsolar winds bringing high-energy particles toward Earthdifferences in the distance between Earth and the Sun during Earth's orbit
Which living organism makes its own food using sunlight?lizardtreedeerhawk
Who was the first person to base a system of classification on organisms having similar structures?AristotleDarwinEinsteinLinnaeus
Which is a process that converts sunlight energy into a compound that stores chemical energy?phototropismphotosynthesisrespirationpollination
Which most likely contributed to the extinction of many species and endangered the survival of others?pollutionhabitat destructionan asteroid hitting Earthtectonic plate movement
Which is the most basic unit of living things?CellsBonesTissuesOrgans
What are the two main jobs of the skeletal system?support and protect the bodydigest food and carry messages for the bodyget rid of wastes and defend the body from diseasesense changes in the environment and carry food through the body
Which is an example of a chemical change?sand separated from water by filteringwater evaporating from a puddlea rock being eroded by winda nail rusting in water
Which of these is a renewable resource found in Nevada?zinc metalgravel depositspetroleum productsgeothermal energy
Which two body systems are involved in inhaling oxygen and exhaling carbon dioxide?endocrine and skeletalexcretory and nervouscirculatory and respiratorydigestive and reproductive
Materials such as carbon and nitrogen go through cycles. The cycling of nitrogen waste materials is mostly dependent upon the role of which factor?atmospherebacteriasunlighttrees
Which of these is unique to the process of scientific investigation?observing an event as it occursdiscussing results with other expertspublishing the results on a webpagecollecting data in an experiment
Which did Thomas Edison invent?microscopecompasslight bulbsteam engine
If soil is permeablewater cannot flow through it.water easily flows through it.it contains many minerals.it contains few minerals.
Sally is making candy on the stove. She places a thermometer in the candy. What is she measuring?lengthspeedtemperatureweight
Anthony and Zach want to know how the temperature of the air affects the temperature of lake water. Which type of tool should they use to measure the temperatures?balancerulerscalethermometer
Which serve as evidence for a scientific theory?guessesopinionsargumentsobservations
Which of the following identifies the primary function of a radio station tower in a communication system?decoderencoderreceivertransmitter
Down feathers are used by many sleeping bag manufacturers because down feathers arefire resistant.comfortable padding.good insulators.water resistant.
A farmer sprayed his orange trees with a pesticide to eliminate the insects damaging the trees. Some of the insects survived and produced offspring that were also resistant to the insecticide. Which process is illustrated by the pesticide resistance of the offspring?natural selectionselective breedingaerobic respirationsexual reproduction
An elephant is a multicellular organism that weighs about 200 pounds at birth and can grow to weigh as much as 15,000 pounds. What increases as the elephant grows into an adult?the size of each body cellthe number of cells in its bodythe amount of energy in its cellsthe collection of water in each cell
The human body is made up of organ systems that work together as one unit. Which systems work together to prepare and distribute food for cells?digestive and circulatorydigestive and endocrinenervous and respiratorynervous and excretory
The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. Which organs are used in reproduction?brain, spinal cord, and eyeslungs, esophagus, and heartmouth, stomach, and gallbladderovaries, uterus, and fallopian tubes
Which type of organism is at the lowest level of the food chain?autotrophheterotrophcarnivoreomnivore
Jake's cats eat food from a can. The cats come running into the kitchen when they hear the electric can opener. Now, each time Jake's mother opens a can of corn, the cats come running. This is an example oflearned behaviorcorrect behaviorinstinctmigration
A team of surveyors takes measurements of ground altitude at horizontal intervals of 1 meter over a 400 square meter area. These measurements can best be used to produce which representation of the area?a topographical mapa map of wind currentsa plate tectonic diagrama chart of sedimentary layers
Some schools have programs to recycle paper products such as student papers, newspapers, and cardboard boxes. Which of these statements describes a positive effect of recycling paper products?Schools need to buy less paper.Fewer trees need to be cut.Landfills have less room for other trash.Recycling consumes more energy than making new paper.
Light sometimes behaves as waves and other times as particles. Which property of light is equally explainable by treating light as either particles or waves?interference of lightreflection of lightdiffraction of lightpolarization of light
The topography of Nevada is dominated by basins and mountain ranges associated with which geological phenomena?faultstrencheshot spotshydrothermal vents
Which biological activity occurs in a repeated rhythm?sneezingcoughingbreathingblinking
Which model best illustrates the wave property that enables scientists to explore Earth's interior using seismic waves?shining a light on rock in a bowlshining a light through a prismshining a light through a periscopeshining a light on a sundial
In 1933, a hurricane came ashore at Ocean City, Maryland. A hurricane negatively affects a coastline bycausing erosioncausing earthquakesincreasing food productionincreasing the growth of grasses
Which statement describes the location of our Sun in the universe?Our Sun orbits Earth in the Andromeda galaxy.Our Sun orbits Earth in the Milky Way galaxy.Our Sun is the center of a solar system in the Milky Way galaxy.Our Sun is the center of a solar system in the Andromeda galaxy.
Scientists claim that the area around the Grand Canyon was once covered by an ocean. What evidence would support their claim?Dinosaur footprints were found near the Grand Canyon.Fish were found living in the rivers of the Grand Canyon.Fossils of ocean animals were found at the Grand Canyon.Bones from desert animals were found at the Grand Canyon.
Which is true of scientific discoveries?All scientific discoveries are based solely on observation and never experimentation.Sometimes scientific discoveries are made by accident, like the discovery of penicillin.If a scientist cannot provide the exact time and place his or her discovery was made, it is dismissed.All scientific discoveries are regulated by government agencies, like the Food and Drug Administration.
Which is a process that most likely formed the Appalachian Mountains found in the eastern part of North America?earthquakefolded rockplate tectonicsvolcanic activity
Which technology used to generate electrical power involves a trade-off between economical electricity and long-term waste disposal problems?fossil fuelnuclear reactorsolar collectorwind turbine
All the ponds in an area dried up during a drought. The population of which of the following animals that live in the area is most affected by the drought?deerfroghawksquirrel
Which substance is usually found in nature as a liquid, solid, and gas?waterrockmetalglass
The scientific name for a giraffe is Giraffa camelopardalis. What two levels of classification does this name represent?family and orderkingdom and genusphylum and domaingenus and species
The Moon has the greatest effect on Earth'syearseasonsocean tidesdaylight hours
Granite is classified as a rock because itis made of minerals.is hard and rounded.has crystals.has mass.
The measure of the amount of light received on Earth from a star is known asparallax.redshift.absolute magnitude.apparent magnitude.
Heat from deep in Earth's interior is transferred to its crust by which of the following?conduction in the oceanconvection in the mantleradiation from the solid coreevaporation at mid-ocean ridges
The growth of which of the following usually occurs first in primary succession on a bare rock?LichensGrassesTreesShrubs
The process by which water vapor in the atmosphere cools and becomes a liquid is calledevaporation.perspiration.condensation.transportation.
A student is dropping objects of various sizes and shapes and recording the time it takes for each object to hit the ground. Which question is the student most likely trying to answer?What force slows some objects down?What force pulls objects to the ground?Do some objects fall more quickly than others?Do objects break or bounce when hitting the ground?
Which two processes in the water cycle are primarily responsible for the creation of a lake?evaporation and runoffevaporation and condensationprecipitation and runoffprecipitation and condensation
The correct procedure after completing a laboratory experiment is toput all non-reusable glass in the trash.pour all used chemicals down the sink.collect and store recyclable material.return used samples to natural settings.
Which is an example of primary ecological succession?plants and animals invading an abandoned crop fieldmangroves stabilizing the soils on tropical coastsminerals spurring rapid plant growthlichen growth on rocks
What is true of mutualistic relationships among organisms?The organisms ignore each other.The organisms cooperate with each other.The organisms prey on each other.The organisms compete with each other.
Carolina uses a microscope to view a soil sample taken from her backyard. Which part of the soil would she ONLY be able to see with a microscope?bacteriagrassrainwaterrocks
The part of the rock cycle that transforms compressed rock formed from sea organism shells into a harder, denser rock isigneous rock becoming sedimentary rock.igneous rock becoming metamorphic rock.metamorphic rock becoming igneous rock.sedimentary rock becoming metamorphic rock.
A group of scientists predicts that Earth's oceans will be able to take up more carbon dioxide as atmospheric carbon dioxide levels increase and the atmosphere warms. Which of these statements about the solubility of gases in ocean water would lead you to question this prediction?Solubility decreases with an increase in salinity.Solubility decreases with an increase in temperature.Solubility increases with an increase in pressure.Solubility increases with an increase in pH.
Which of the following elements is best able to combine with itself and hydrogen [H] to form large molecules?sodium [Na]lithium [Li]sulfur [S]carbon [C]
Growing thicker fur in the winter helps some animals tohide from dangerattract a matefind foodkeep warm
Several types of mechanisms in the body regulate the rate of chemical reactions in the digestive system. Among the most important are feedback systems, which control the release rate oflipids.enzymes.nucleic acids.carbohydrates.
The water in a pond gets colder one night. Which tool is best to observe its temperature change?balancemagnifying glassrulerthermometer
During subduction, one tectonic plate is forced below another. The subducting plate is forced into theasthenosphere.lithosphere.outer core.inner core.
What two gases make up most of the Earth's atmosphere?Hydrogen and oxygenHydrogen and nitrogenOxygen and carbon dioxideOxygen and nitrogen
A light-year is a measure oftime.energy.distance.direction.
Some birds live in a forest. If many of the trees in the forest are cut down, the shelter for the birds willdecreaseincreaseremain the same
In the human body, cellular respiration breaks down sugar molecules after they enter the cell. What results from this process?growth of bacteriarelease of energyactivity of enzymesproduction of oxygen
What causes a person to have blue eyes?eating foods high in protein at a young agehaving a brother or sister with blue eyesbeing overexposed to the Sun at a young agereceiving a gene for blue eyes from each parent
When an atom loses or gains an electron, it changesatomic mass.atomic number.charge.element.
In which pair of elements are both metalloids?Sn and SbSb and TeTe and II and Xe
Florida has a large supply of phosphate that ancient seas deposited millions of years ago. The phosphate contains the remains of animals that were deposited in layers on the sea floor. Which type of rock did the phosphate become?intrusive igneousextrusive igneousclastic sedimentaryorganic sedimentary
After months of studying and obtaining data on the behavior of birds, biologists from around the world will look at the data andcome up with several possible interpretations.reject it and do their own investigations.change the data to fit their expectations.publish their own interpretations in a science journal.
Which mixture can be easily separated by adding water and pouring it through a coffee filter?sugar and saltsalt and sandsugar and baking sodairon filings and sand
Living things depend on energy fromthe Sunthe Moonsoilwater
Research into the total amount of oil available for use around the world can affect what kind of human choice?where to retirehow to travel to workwhat kind of coffee to drinkwhether to recycle glass and aluminum
Hydrochloric acid (HCl) reacts with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) to produce a saltwater solution. What are the products of this chemical reaction?NaCl and H_{2}ONaOH and HClHCl and NaClNaOH and H_{2}O
Which human activity most often has a harmful effect on the environment?breathinggrowingplantingpolluting
Young frogs do not resemble adult frogs. Which term is given to this pattern of development in frogs?asexual reproductioncloningmetamorphosisbiological adaptation
Bones support the body. What pulls and pushes on bones to move them?bloodnervesmusclesskin
Which statement best describes why a calcium-fortified juice would advertise that it is good for growing children?Calcium helps the growth of bones.Calcium provides energy for growth.Children need to drink a lot of fluids.Children need calcium to prevent allergies.
Which of these tectonic plate boundaries is most likely to form a volcano?a continental plate colliding with a continental platean oceanic plate sliding past a continental platea continental plate sliding past a continental platean oceanic plate colliding into a continental plate
Which of the following is an example of heat transfer by conduction?a whole metal spoon getting hot when one end is in hot soupthe inside of a car in the sun getting very hota tar road getting hotter in the sun than a concrete sidewalka fireplace fire heating a room on a cold day
Alicia gives her brother a push while he is seated on a swing. She finds that after a few seconds, she needs to push again to keep him going. The reason her brother slows down is because the mechanical energy is converted intopotential energy that heats the air.chemical energy that moves the swing.kinetic energy which makes the swing slow down.thermal energy that is released into the atmosphere.
An example of a learned behavior is aspider building a web.dog laying down on command.beaver building a dam in a creek.kangaroo jumping away from a predator.
An atom consists of a nucleus surrounded byions.protons.neutrons.electrons.
Which of these causes the atmosphere to change?increased inorganic matter in soilincreased use of fertilizers on cropsincreased buildup of greenhouse gasesincreased rainfall rates near power plants
Which element is most likely to form an ion with a negative 2 charge?oxygennitrogenberylliummagnesium
Mount St. Helens was a cone-shaped mountain that formed when molten material reached the surface of Earth and formed layers. Cone-shaped mountains form as a result of which one of these events?hurricanesearthquakesvolcanic eruptionssediment depositions
Which process in the water cycle would be accelerated by an increase in temperature?runoffevaporationprecipitationcondensation
Which of the following foods is highest in polysaccharides?broccolipotatoescheesefish
Colored alcohol is used in some glass thermometers. When placed in air of different temperatures, the column of alcohol rises or falls in the glass thermometer. Which of the following best explains why the height of the alcohol column changes?The glass contracts when heated.The alcohol contracts when heated.The glass expands more than the alcohol when heated.The alcohol expands more than the glass when heated.
An organism, such as a nematode worm, may have only 1000 cells. It should be classified as beinga virus.a bacteria.unicellular.multicellular.
The Heliocentric Theory, as supported by Copernicus, revolutionized scientific theories regardingthe life cycle.the water cycle.the solar system.the immune system.
Which process causes the leaves of a plant to become larger?repairgrowthdecompositiongermination
Wind changes the surface of Earth. Which of these land formations is a result of transportation and deposition by wind?a deltaa glaciera sand dunea mountain peak
Water moves by capillary action through soil from moist areas to dry areas. Which property of water is most responsible for this capillary action?Water is a polar molecule.Water contains an oxygen atom.Water has a high surface tension.Water has a high specific heat.
Which action is the best method to separate a mixture of salt and water?using a magnet to extract the saltadding a colored dye to the mixturepouring the mixture through a filterboiling the mixture until the water evaporates
In humans, a trait can be determined by one pair or many pairs ofgenesmicrobescellsorgans
Which animal develops inside its mother before it is born alive?ButterflyCatDuckFrog
Which sequence correctly shows the levels of organization for structure and function in a human?cell -> tissue -> organ -> organ systemorgan system -> cell -> tissue -> organtissue -> organ -> organ system -> cellcell -> organ -> tissue -> organ system
Which adaptation allows a fish to get oxygen underwater?finslungsgillsheart
The number of daylight hours in New York State changes with theseason of the yearMoon's changing appearancedirection of the windarrival of a severe storm
Which instrument would be used when studying a unit on amphibian anatomy?a beakera telescopea dissecting kita graduated cylinder
Which is a reason for Arkansas having multiple seasons?the tilt of Earth's axisthe speed of Earth's orbitEarth's distance from the SunEarth gravitational pull toward the Moon
Jessica watches the Sun set in the evening sky. What causes the setting of the Sun?The distance between Earth and the Sun is increasing.The tilt of Earth on its axis is constantly changing.Earth is revolving around the Sun.Earth is rotating on its axis.
To which planet do National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) scientists hope to send humans next?MarsVenusJupiterMercury
Which force keeps the planets in their orbits around the Sun?gravitymagnetismelectricityfriction
The endangered Florida manatee is a large, aquatic mammal that feeds on sea grasses in brackish water. Due to where they like to feed, manatees are vulnerable to injuries from boat propellers. If speed zones requiring boats to maintain a low speed are placed in areas where manatees are known to congregate, which will most likely occur?less water pollution in manatee habitats will occurmanatees will seek alternate food sourcesnew manatee predators will surfacemanatee populations will increase
Which is an example of a different substance being formed?glass breakingmetal meltingwater freezingwood burning
A mixture of powdered iron and sulfur is heated. What will be formed?a single elementtwo other elementsa solutionan alloya compound
Scientists can identify an element by looking at the structure of a singleatom.neutron.molecule.electron.
Newly made proteins are modified in which organelle?ribosomeendoplasmic reticulummitochondrionnuclear envelop
Which of the following is the primary advantage of sexual reproduction when compared to asexual reproduction?There is a greater number of offspring.There is more food available to offspring.There is greater genetic variety in offspring.There is a longer development time for offspring.
By attaching to sharks, remora fish eat the scraps of food left behind when the sharks feed. If remoras were not able to attach to sharks, they would most likelyattach to boats.not be able to survive.find another source of food.not need to eat anymore.
Plants need a source of energy in order to perform photosynthesis. From which source do plants receive the energy needed to perform photosynthesis?oxygensugarsunlightwater
What form of energy is stored in a battery?chemicalsoundlightheat
When a light bulb is turned on, energy changes from one form to another. Which of the following best describes this change?sound energy to light energynuclear energy to light energyelectrical energy to light energymagnetic energy to light energy
Which stimulus causes a porcupine to extend its quills?lunar effect on Earthseasonal temperature changesthreatening behavior by predatorsenvironmental encroachment by humans
When a balloon is filled with air and suddenly released, it will fly around the room as the air escapes. If compared to space transportation, the escaping air is most similar to what subsystem of a spacecraft?guidancepropulsionsupportsuspension
The Sun appears larger than other stars because of itsyellow colorhigh temperaturedistance from Earthchemical composition
How hot is it on the surface of the Sun?Not quite as hot as boiling waterAbout as hot as fireAbout 100°FMuch hotter than almost anything on Earth
Which two observations are both used to describe weather?precipitation and runofftemperature and sky conditionswind speed and erosiontypes of clouds and deposition
A scientist combines oxygen and hydrogen to form water. This combination illustrates that water isan atom.an element.a mixture.a compound.
In a large forest with many animals, there are only a small number of bears. Which of these most likely limits the population of bears in the forest?supply of foodtype of treepredation by carnivoresamount of suitable shelter
There is a thunderstorm close to your house. The windows rattle at the same time that you hear the thunder. What causes the windows to rattle?Sound waves from the thunderLight from the lightningRain from the cloudsThe high humidity during the storm
Rocks in warm and humid environments can be weathered faster than rocks in other environments. Which is most likely the next step in the rock cycle for weathered rocks?They are cemented.They are compacted.They become eroded.They become molted.
If the solar system were used as a model of an atom, what would the Sun most likely represent?an iona nucleusa neutronan electron
A student provides the following directions for brushing teeth: • Turn on the water. • Fill the glass with water and leave the water running. • Put toothpaste on the toothbrush. • Brush for two minutes. • Rinse mouth with the water from the glass. • Rinse the toothbrush with the running water. • Turn off the water. Which change in these directions would conserve the most water?Brush for three minutes.Turn the water off before brushing.Rinse mouth with the running water.Use less toothpaste on the toothbrush.
Which of these shows the correct order for the central dogma of molecular biology?DNA to protein to RNARNA to DNA to proteinprotein to DNA to RNADNA to RNA to protein
Meiosis contributes to the process of reproduction by producing what type of cell?aneuploiddiploidhaploidpolyploid
The abundance of a mineral at the surface of Earth most likely depends upon theclimate of a particular region.types of elements available in the crust.thicknesses of nearby rock layers.exposure of the elements to the environment.
Which has the greatest effect on aiding the movement of blood through the human body?tensionfrictiondensitygravity
Why should scientists wear goggles during experiments?to block out bright sunlightto magnify small objectsto protect their eyesto see in the dark
Which of the following organisms produces energy from sunlight?wormrabbithawkgrass
Which statement is true for all objects?All objects are shiny.All objects are hard.All objects are rough.All objects have mass.
Elements in the same column of the Periodic Table of the Elements allhave the same number of protons.share the same atomic structure.have similar physical characteristics.share the same number of neutrons.
What is the main function of scales on a fish?to protect the fishto attract predatorsto help the fish find foodto help the fish breathe
Which invention made mass production possible?the assembly linethe airplanethe personal computerthe telephone
What causes a meteoroid to glow as it falls through the atmosphere of Earth?windgravityfrictionsunlight
The cheetah population around the world has decreased because of poaching and loss of habitat. The surviving population is found to have similar alleles. Which factor is endangering the species' survival the most?harmful genetic mutationsshrinking of the gene pooldecrease in competitionincrease in adaptations
What is generated when the students count and record the number of organisms in the pond water?datavariablesa hypothesisa conclusion
The Mariana Trench is the deepest ocean trench on Earth. This trench occurs at a plate boundary whereone plate is sliding past another.one plate is being forced beneath another.two plates are colliding into each other.two plates are pulling apart from each other.
Students want to find out at which temperature bean plants grow tallest. Which science process skill would be used to find this temperature?inferringpredictingmeasuringclassifying
When would the highest tides occur along the Texas coast?at sunriseat sunsetduring a full moonduring a half moon
Sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) combine to form sodium chloride (NaCl), which is commonly known assoap.vinegar.table salt.baking soda.
It rained on a hot summer afternoon and a puddle formed. After several hours, the puddle was gone. Which two processes made the puddle form and then disappear?precipitation followed by evaporationdeposition followed by evaporationprecipitation followed by runoffdeposition followed by runoff
Which environmental problem was directly caused by the invention of the automobile?storage of nuclear wasteincrease in air pollutionincreased use of pesticidesflooding in the Midwest
At some places in Florida, sand on the beaches is being reduced. New sand is brought from other areas and spread on the beaches. What process causes this reduction to the beach sand?earthquakeserosionlandslidesweathering
Which characteristic of a volvox colony makes it more like a multicellular organism than a simple cluster of unicellular organisms?The cells in the colony respond to stimuli separately.The cells in the colony are arranged in a specific shape.Some cells in the colony are specialized for reproduction.Cells in the colony are connected by strands of cytoplasm.
Students are investigating which type of fruit attracts the most fruit flies. Equally sized pieces of ripe apple, peach, and banana are placed in separate containers. The containers allow fruit flies to enter, but the fruit flies are unable to escape. The containers are placed outside on a picnic table for two days. The most reliable method for collecting data is to count the number of fruit flieson all three types of fruit every two hourson all three types of fruit after each fruit spoilson the banana on Day 1, the apple on Day 2, and the peach on Day 3on the banana after Hour 1, the apple after Hour 2, and the peach after Hour 3
Malaria is a common disease in many countries. What is the cause of this disease?a virusa bacteriuma fungusa parasite
Mold is often found growing on old bread. In a food chain, mold is a ___.decomposerproducerconsumerscavenger
Which form of energy are x rays and ultraviolet light?nuclearheatelectromagneticchemical
Which of these geographic features most directly influences the climate of Nevada by limiting the amount of water vapor that can reach the state and fall as rain?Pacific OceanColorado RiverSierra Nevada MountainsColumbia River Basin
Cells come in two basic types, prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Which cell structure is found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?vacuolenucleoidmitochondrioncytoplasm
From which part of the plant does a bee get food?flowerseedstemroot
As Earth revolves around the Sun, the number of daylight hours varies from place to place. In which location would the number of daylight hours remain constant?North PolePrime MeridianEquatorAntarctica
Why does tapping a fork against a water glass produce a sound?The air expands.The fork releases electrons.The particles in the objects vibrate.The water in the glass forms ripples.
A student places a sheet of black construction paper on her desk. What happens to most of the light that strikes the black construction paper?The light is bent by the paper.The light reflects off the paper.The light is absorbed by the paper.The light passes through the paper.
Which of these groups animals are ALL mammals?duck, eagle, parrotmouse, monkey, batbutterfly, ant, mosquitocrocodile, snake, turtle
Which part of a plant cell is responsible for controlling the activities of the other parts of the cell?VacuoleNucleusCell wallChloroplast
All metabolic functions fall into one of two categories: a breaking down process (catabolic) or a building up process (anabolic). Which is an example of an anabolic process?respirationprotein synthesisoxygen transportcarbohydrate digestion
Clearing forests of trees and vegetation for human development can have major impacts on the ecosystem. Which would most likely occur after a forested area is cleared?an increase in habitat for wildlifea decrease in food competitionan increase in soil erosiona decrease in water runoff
Which of these is the most responsible for the changes of the seasons on Earth?Position of the MoonTilt of Earth on its axisTemperature of the SunDistance to Mars
Turning off the light when leaving a room is an example ofconserving energy.wasting energy.using potential energy.using chemical energy.
Which list contains only things that are part of our solar system?planets, moons, cometsgalaxies, quasars, asteroidsblack holes, novas, starsclusters, asteroids, meteors
A family installs a new heating system in their home. Which is the most desirable result of the new heating system?producing more noise pollutiondecreasing the amount of energy usedincreasing the use of natural resourcesincreasing the time it takes to heat the home
The Andes Mountains in South America formed when an oceanic plate shifted beneath a continental plate. Which other landforms are usually associated with this type of plate boundary?barrier islandsocean trenchesmid-ocean ridgesvolcanic island arcs
Which of the following animals goes through metamorphosis?alligatorfroglizardturtle
Which group of organisms can make food by a process called chemosynthesis?scavengersproducersconsumersdecomposers
Which of these are broken down during chemical, but not physical, changes?elementsmixturessolutionscompounds
Fossils of clam shells were found in the Appalachian Mountains. Which of these statements best explains why the clam shells were found in the Appalachian Mountains?The mountain range was once under water.Birds flying overhead dropped the clam shells.Animals released the clam shells in their waste.The clams lived on land before moving to water.
When a formula unit of magnesium sulfide, MgS, is separated into magnesium and sulfur particles, the particles are calledmolecules.ions.isotopes.compounds.
Which action is an example of an exothermic process?baking breadcooking an eggmaking ice cubesevaporation of water
Which best explains why some reptiles and amphibians lay an abundance of eggs?It increases the population.The eggs provide food for predators.These animals do not have to stay with their eggs.It increases the chance of some eggs surviving to hatch.
Which is the best example of recycling?using low energy applianceswashing and reusing plastic cupsusing empty milk cartons as flower plantersusing aluminum cans to make new products
When two objects are touching, heat is transferred from the warmer object to the cooler one byradiation.convection.conduction.insulation.
Genes code for specifically structuredacids.lipids.sugars.proteins.
What is the repeating monomer of a DNA molecule?triglyceridedipeptidenucleotidephospholipid
The range of all forms of radiant energy is called thevideo spectrum.audio spectrum.color spectrum.electromagnetic spectrum.
Which of the following is one reason that quartz is classified as a mineral?It can be manufactured.It comes in different colors.It has a specific crystal structure.It can be melted at high temperatures.
Which of the following activities is the best example of instinctive behavior in an animal?A dog sits when told to sit by its owner.A bird avoids an insect that has a bad taste.A newly hatched sea turtle walks toward the ocean.A chimpanzee uses a stick to pull termites from a tree stump.
If wolves prey on deer for food, what will most likely happen to the deer population if wolves are removed from an area where deer live?The population of deer will increase.The population of deer will decrease.The population of deer will remain the same.The population of deer will become extinct.
Which is a feedback mechanism the human body uses to maintain homeostasis?copying genetic material during cell divisionrejecting a flu vaccine by the immune systemperspiring to lower the body temperaturelearning a new behavior to survive in a new environment
Changes to Earth's surface can happen slowly or quickly. Which of these changes happens the most quickly?a mountain eroding to a hilla river making a deltaa glacier making a canyona storm moving a sandbar
What event happens in a daily cycle?cliffs eroderivers floodvolcanoes erupthigh and low tides
The burning of fossil fuels has added pollutants that contain sulfur atoms to the air. These pollutants have contributed to which of the following?droughtacid raintornadoestemperature inversions
A scientist was examining a large boulder that was covered with lichens (a combination of fungi and algae). He chipped a piece of the rock and placed it under a microscope. He observed that the surface of the rock was breaking down underneath the lichen. Which was the scientist most likely observing?the interaction between abiotic factorsthe effects of chemical weatheringthe process of depositionthe effects of abrasion
Which organism belongs in the kingdom Protista?spongeliverwortmushroomparamecium
How is the structure of an atom best described?a negative core surrounded by densely packed mattera neutral core surrounded by mostly empty spacea positive core surrounded by mostly empty spacea positive core surrounded by densely packed matter
What do producers need to make food?sunlight, oxygen, and carbon dioxidesunlight, water, and carbon dioxidewater, oxygen, and carbon dioxidewater, oxygen, and sunlight
Fish can live in lakes that are frozen because liquid water remains below the ice at the surface. Which of these describes a property of water that allows some liquid water to remain in frozen lakes?Water can dissolve many different substances.Water is less dense as a solid than as a liquid.Water has a Mohs hardness of about 2 when it is frozen.Water holds less air at higher temperatures.
A certain disease of the spinal cord can be passed on from a dog to its offspring. This disease can result in the dog's muscles becoming weak, leading to paralysis. This is an example ofan infectious disease.a respiratory disease.an inherited disease.an environmental disease.
Paula determines a property of a marble using a balance and a graduated cylinder. What property is Paula most likely determining by using both tools?densitylengthmassvolume
Why do satellites and spacecraft launched from Earth need to reach a specific speed to escape Earth's surface?to overcome Earth's gravitational forceto protect equipment from radiationto break through the sound barrierto avoid Earth's magnetic field
Which of these is a nonliving part of a forest?TreeSoilWormMushroom
Which change increases the rate of a chemical reaction?increasing the reaction temperatureusing larger particles of solid reactantsreducing the concentration of the reactantsadding an inhibitor to the reaction mixture
Which characteristic is found ONLY in mammals?eyes that detect colorglands that make milkskin that absorbs oxygenbodies that are protected by scales
The relationship between an owl and a mouse is aparasite-host relationship.symbiotic relationship.mutualistic relationship.predator-prey relationship.
The heart, veins, arteries, and capillaries make up which organ system?reproductivemuscularexcretorycirculatory
Some kinds of fish live most of their lives in salt water but lay their eggs in freshwater. Their ability to survive in different environments is an example ofadaptationdevelopmental stagesa habitselective breeding
Which of the following statements applies to all states of matter?Matter takes the shape of its container.Matter is made up of particles that are stationary.Matter consists of tightly packed particles.Matter is made up of particles called atoms.
Which process in the water cycle returns water from the surface of Earth to the atmosphere?condensationevaporationprecipitationrunoff
Which of the following organisms have the greatest effect on an ecosystem because of the changes they make to their environment?bees building a hive in a hollow treewasps building a nest in a leafy bushbeavers building a dam across a streamfish digging a burrow on a river bottom
Which inventor had the greatest impact on the development of artificial light?Charles DarwinAlbert EinsteinThomas EdisonBenjamin Franklin
Mounds and ridges in the Snake Range area of Nevada are composed of boulders, sand, and gravel. These landforms were most likely formed byearthquakes.melting glaciers.wind erosion.hurricanes.
Noah studied different systems in the human body. Which best describes a function of veins in the circulatory system?carrying blood from the body to the heartsupplying nutrients from the intestines to the bodycarrying carbon dioxide from the body to the lungspassing waste materials from the blood to outside the body
A genetic mutation has caused the fur color of field mice to contrast with their environment. This type of mutation will most likelybenefit the mice.harm the mice.increase reproductive rates.decrease competition for resources.
Ella has several wooden blocks. When Ella holds the blocks in her hand, she feels that they are rough. Which term best describes what Ella feels?a predictiona conclusiona hypothesisan observation
Which is most likely a cancer treatment?a drug that kills only very small cellsa drug that kills only very large cellsa drug that kills only slowly dividing cellsa drug that kills only rapidly dividing cells
What happens to the physical state of water when it freezes?expandscontractschanges colorbecomes warm
When electric current flows through the metal filament of a light bulb, electrical energy is converted toheat energy only.heat and light energy.light and motion energy.light energy only.
At night, the Moon is the brightest object in the sky. Where does the Moon's light come from?The Moon reflects light from Earth.The Moon reflects light from the Sun.The Moon makes light beneath its surface.The Moon has rocks on its surface that glow.
Strong winds have the ability to uproot large trees in a wooded area. Which of these organisms would most likely benefit from this change in a habitat?a bee colony that needs a hivea bird that needs to build a nesta squirrel that needs to find sheltera plant that needs sunlight to grow
Residential construction is expanding in Florida. The expansion has caused fragmentation of habitats. One of the results of the increased construction is a decrease in the number of large predators such as the coyote, black bear, and panther. Which will be the most immediate local result of this fragmentation?decrease in middle-sized predatorslarge predators will become extinctincrease in population of prey speciesincrease in population of top carnivores
Which of these resources is renewable?natural gasoilcoalwind
Which property of air does a barometer measure?speedpressurehumiditytemperature
Which measurement represents the mass of an object?35 centimeters35 grams35 liters35 degrees
The primary function of insulin in our bodies is tostore fuel for later use.regulate the amount of glucose in the blood.increase the efficiency of fuel consumption.prevent digestive bacteria from consuming glucose.
Which type of organism is the best at fixing nitrogen?bacteriafungiprotistsanimals
A scientist studies how weathering and erosion can change the shape of a mountain. The scientist needs to collect information over what period of time to gather the most accurate information?daysweeksmonthsyears
Many types of organisms live in a meadow. With the introduction of a large, swift-moving predator into the meadow ecosystem, which group of organisms will MOST likely have an advantage of surviving and reproducing?mice that have the thickest furfoxes that have the largest earsgophers that dig the deepest holesrabbits that can run the fastest
The systems of the human body work together. Which system works with the skeletal system by pulling on the bones to create movement?digestivecirculatorymuscularnervous
Scientists Stanley Miller and Harold Urey sealed water, methane, ammonia, and hydrogen in a flask, to simulate Earth's early environment. They exposed the chemicals to electric charges to simulate lighting. What did the process produce?bacterianucleic acidsvirusesamino acids
Many birds fly south for the winter. This adaptation is calledhibernationgerminationmigrationcommunication
Air is made up of many gases. Which gas is found in the greatest amount?NitrogenOxygenCarbon dioxideHydrogen
Biotic forces can cause changes to the surface of Earth. Which is the best example of living organisms causing weathering?Beavers building a dam across a stream.Cattle walking and grazing in a grassland.Salmon making nests for their eggs in a stream.Tree seedlings growing and forming cracks in rocks.
The digestion process begins in which of the following?large intestinemouthsmall intestinestomach
Certain fossils can be used to help determine the age of the rock layer in which the fossils are found. Which type of fossil is best to use when making this determination?marine mammal fossilswamp fern fossiltrace fossilindex fossil
In pea plants, tall is dominant over short. What size pea plants will result when a pure tall plant is crossed with a pure short plant?middle-sized plantsshort plantstall plantssome tall and some short plants
One way animals usually respond to a sudden drop in temperature is bysweatingshiveringblinkingsalivating
The continental crust floats on top of the mantle because the crust isless dense than the mantle.made of a liquid material.made up of oxygen which is a light element.separated from the mantle by a layer of water.
Joanne wants to investigate factors that affect different patterns of the flight of bees. Which step in the scientific method must she follow before forming a hypothesis?record data of numbers of beesmeasure the distances of bee flightsdraw a conclusion about when bees flygather information about flight patterns
Which set contains kingdoms that contain only heterotrophs?Protists, FungiBacteria, AnimalsPlants, FungiAnimals, Fungi
Chromosomes contain the genetic information of an organism. Fruit flies reproduce by sexual reproduction. Most of the cells of a fruit fly have 8 chromosomes. Which statement best explains the source of the chromosomes in a normal fertilized fruit fly egg?The egg cell contains all 8 chromosomes.The sperm cell contains all 8 chromosomes.The sperm cell provides 4 chromosomes and the egg cell provides 4 chromosomes.The egg cell provides 4 chromosomes and 4 sperm cells each provide 1 chromosome.
Which weather instrument measures air pressure?thermometeranemometerrain gaugebarometer
A volcano under the ocean slowly releases lava over time. As the lava is released, it cools and hardens on the ocean floor. Which feature will most likely form from the release and cooling of the lava on the ocean floor over time?a faultan islanda reefa sandbar
The main function of a duck's webbed feet is to help the duckmake noiseprotect itselfswim in waterfind a mate
Which is a quick process that can form new land near an ocean?earthquakelandslidevolcano eruptingweathering from waves
Which of these features of Earth's crust are caused by the shifting of tectonic plates?mid-ocean ridgesdesert sand dunesU-shaped valleyscontinental shelves
Which of the following helps the leaves break down after they have fallen off the tree?meat-eatersrocksdecomposerscold temperatures
Where are proteins synthesized?mitochondriaribosomescentrioleslysosomes
When compared to current average conditions, which term would best describe conditions in Earth's lower atmosphere if greenhouse gases were absent?densercoolerwettercloudier
Plumes of water vapor have been observed rising from the southern polar region of Enceladus, one of the moons of Saturn. A team of scientists proposed an explanation for the plumes and developed a model. They also published calculations based on their model. These calculations would most likely be used for which purpose in future research?testing the hypothesisevaluating similar eventsmapping routes for explorationchecking the validity of observations
If water gets into the crack of a rock and then freezes, the rock will MOST likelybreak apartbe able to floatbecome largerchange colors
Which organisms form the base of all ecosystems?scavengersproducersconsumersdecomposers
Martin is writing a report for science class about how the tilt of Earth affects living organisms. Which subject should Martin include in his report that is directly affected by Earth's tilt?night and daycloud formationphases of the Moonchanging of the seasons
In what way do transit systems, such as buses, benefit society?by reducing the amount of pollutionby increasing the number of car salesby increasing the amount of carbon dioxide in the airby eliminating the possibility of accidents
Increased nutrient levels in lakes can cause ecological changes that result in the death of many fish. At what point in the hydrological cycle are most nutrients deposited into lakes?runoffevaporationprecipitationtranspiration
Which of these cell parts contain instructions for the passage of traits from one generation to the next?cell membraneGolgi apparatuschromosomesendoplasmic reticulum
Which action causes a chemical change?leaves dropping from a treeleaves blowing in the windleaves being burned in a fireleaves being crushed into pieces
Which type of organism would most likely benefit directly from increased levels of CO_{2}?fishbirdtreemushroom
When the lighted half of the Moon faces the Sun and the dark half faces Earth, the phase of the Moon viewed from Earth is called thefull moon.new moon.waxing moon.waning moon.
The flower petals of a hydrangea plant change color as the acidity of the soil changes. The color changes are directly related to which factor?gravitropismphotosynthesisgeographic locationenvironmental conditions
What is significant about the discovery of water on Mars?It proves there is life on Mars.It provides evidence there may be life on Mars.It proves there was an advanced civilization on Mars.It provides evidence of an advanced civilization on Mars.
A teacher places an item in a box. The item takes the shape of the entire container. This item is most likelyair.milk.water.paint.
In New York State, the shortest period of daylight occurs during which month?DecemberJuneMarchSeptember
During which of the processes below does water vapor change to liquid water?meltingfreezingevaporationcondensation
Which technological advancement has done the most to improve the accuracy of weather predictions?barometerweather balloonsanemometersatellites
An important rule for students to know when heating a test tube is toplace a cork in the mouth of the test tube.point the mouth of the test tube away from others.hold the test tube loosely with the fingertips.shake the test tube forcefully to keep contents mixed.
How would a drought most likely affect the plants of a grassy plain?There would be shorter plants.They would have thicker stems.There would be a greater variety.They would have brighter flowers.
The brain and spinal cord are parts of which body system?nervousexcretoryendocrinerespiratory
Chromosome mutations involve the deletion or duplication of many genes. The effects of chromosome mutations are often much greater than mutations within a single gene, because chromosome mutationscan only occur at the time of fertilization.can cause abnormal development of the offspring.are always beneficial to the organism.are rarely passed on to the next generation.
What will most likely result when the jet stream moves south of North Carolina?North Carolina will experience tropical weather conditions.North Carolina will experience hot, dry weather.North Carolina will experience mild weather.North Carolina will experience cold weather.
Estuaries in Florida often have mangrove trees growing in them. The roots of the mangrove trees slow the flow of the water, which allows soil particles to settle. If people were allowed to remove the mangrove trees, how would the estuary environment most likely be affected?The amounts of nutrients in the water would decrease.More habitats for fish would be established.Populations of grasses would increase.The risk of erosion would be reduced.
Which sense can be used to determine an object's ability to reflect light?sighthearingsmelltaste
The North America Nebula is named for its similarity in shape to the North American continent. It was discovered within the Milky Way by astronomer William Herschel in 1790. What was Mr. Herschel most likely observing?the explosion following the collapse of a stara dense cluster of stars of varying magnitudesmeteorites as Earth passed through the tail of a cometa cloud of hydrogen gas and dust where stars are born
Which animals are most likely to carry the seeds found in berries from the parent plant to another area?beesbirdsfliescaterpillars
All rocks are composed offossilscellsmetalsminerals
In some dry areas, large amounts of water have been pumped from underground sources where water has been naturally stored for thousands of years. If the water is not replaced, what type of land feature is most likely to result?deltalakedesertmountains
Which scientist studied biology by traveling by ship to different islands observing animal life, and developed a hypothesis about how species change?Galileo GalileiAlbert EinsteinCharles DarwinSir Isaac Newton
How does a student best avoid becoming dehydrated during a field investigation on a hot day?drink water from a bottlewear a wide-brimmed hatdrink a lot before leaving schooldrink from a clear running stream
The primary function of a doorbell circuit is to convert electrical energy intosound.motion.radiant energy.chemical energy.
A lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes through Earth's shadow. A lunar eclipse can only occur during afull moon.new moon.first quarter moon.last quarter moon.
A recent study concluded that about 90% of all large predatory fish such as tuna have disappeared from the world's oceans in the past 50 years. Which of these is most likely the direct cause of this loss?Urban development near the coastCommercial harvesting from the oceanClimate change on EarthAcid precipitation over the oceans
When an ice cube melts, its state of matter changes from agas to a liquidsolid to a liquidliquid to a solidsolid to a gas
In which way are evaporation and condensation similar?Both cause decreases in air temperature.Both cause increases in air temperature.Both are caused by the warming of the atmosphere.Both are caused by changes in heat energy.
The surface of a heated metal object measures 120°C. It is dropped into a bucket filled with water measuring 10°C. Which of the following is most likely to occur?Both the water and metal will adjust to the same temperature below 10°C.The water and metal will adjust to different temperatures above 120°C.The water will remain the same temperature, but the metal will cool to 10°C.The water and metal will adjust to the same temperature between 10°C and 120°C.
In order to record the passing of a distant comet, which instruments would be the most useful?camera, tripod, and telescopetelescope, binoculars, and cameracamera with flash attachment, and tripodtelescope with camera attachment and camera
Temperature is the measurement of which type of energy?chemicalmechanicalpotentialkinetic
Scientists are discovering ways to make some crops use less water. A person working in which job would most benefit from this research?a farmera doctora waitera cook
Stem cells are cells that can differentiate into many different kinds of cells. Scientists have discovered that the environment supporting the cells influences stem-cell differentiation. For example, stem cells grown on strong, flexible surfaces became muscle cells. What most likely happened to stem cells grown on a hard, rigid surface?They became nerve cells.They became red blood cells.They became bone cells.They became skin cells.
Sherry is going to use her computer to draw a three-dimensional box. She wants to be able to specify the exact dimensions and angles and to rotate the box as needed on the screen. Which of the following types of programs would Sherry most likely use for this purpose?word processing softwaremath spreadsheet programInternet-based search enginecomputer-aided design program
Scientists who have studied the hydrosphere concluded that about 71% of Earth is covered with water. Which part of the hydrosphere is most often associated with the formation of organic rocks?lakesoceanspondsrivers
Which property of proteins best allows them to perform an enormously diverse range of functions?their large, chemical-energy reservetheir large, stored-electric potentialthe complexity of their folded structurethe wide variety of elements they include
The mathematical model for calculating speed is shown below. Speed = distance/time. An airplane traveled 700 kilometers in two hours during a trip. What was the average speed of the plane during the trip?5.8 kilometers per hour350 kilometers per hour1400 kilometers per hour84,000 kilometers per hour
What is the best way for a marine scientist to determine the eating habits of sharks?Tag one shark and monitor its eating habits for one day.Tag one shark and monitor its eating habits for one year.Tag several sharks and monitor their eating habits for one day.Tag several sharks and monitor their eating habits for one year.
A student pushes a wooden block across a sheet of sandpaper. Which characteristic of the block increases?hardnessmasssizetemperature
Amanda is learning about different adaptations of animals. Which is an example of a behavioral adaptation?webbed feet on a duckmigration of songbirdssharp eyesight of an eaglecamouflaged colors on a frog
Which of the following is the best example of a custom-made product?graphing calculatorlight bulbneedle nose pliersartificial leg
Michelle is interested in improving the quality of the soil in her yard. She wants more water and air to penetrate the soil. What should she add to the soil to help her achieve this goal?bacteriafertilizerspesticidesearthworms
Which of these could cause water vapor to condense into rain droplets?sunlight warming the surface of oceansair rising into colder regions of the atmospherelightning heating the air in the atmospherewinds blowing along the surface of the ground
The human body processes and eliminates food waste using the organs of the excretory system. Which organelle performs a similar function in humans at the cellular level?mitochondrionendoplasmic reticulumlysosomeGolgi complex
What causes the most soil and rock erosion?sunwindwatergravity
The theory of continental drift states that the land masses called continents were once closer together and have drifted apart over time. Which circumstance is the strongest evidence in support of this theory?the migration patterns of birdsthe periodic climate changes of Earththe large variety of animals on each continentthe similarity of fossils on different continents
Rich beds of marine fossils have been found in Florida. By dating these fossils, scientists can best determinewhen Florida collided with the North American continent.the date when organisms moved onto dry land.the period during which Florida was covered in water.when the atmosphere of Earth was more humid than it is today.
In the forest, one type of tree produces special seeds. These seeds start to grow only after going through a fire. In the fire, the adult trees are destroyed. Which resources, needed for growth, are now available to the newly growing seeds?sunlight and windsunlight and spacesoil and pollen producerspollen producers and space
Which is an example of a decomposer?a hawka mousea flowera mushroom
In the lab, students are working with substances that could cause burns. Which of these safety precautions is most important to follow?Sinks are empty.Glassware is clean.Eye protection is worn.Electrical equipment is off.
Which process moves an ion across a cell membrane against the concentration gradient?diffusionexocytosisfacilitated diffusionactive transport
Which would most likely be the characteristic of an object with a small volume and large mass?high densitylow pressurelow viscosityhigh temperature
Which of these describes a small range in the electromagnetic spectrum?gravityradiationelectricitylight
An idea that the universe originated with an explosion is supported by repeated observations of light from distant galaxies traveling away from Earth. An idea that has been tested repeatedly and is supported by repeated results is most likely ahypothesis.theory.law.fact.
Natural selection cannot occur withoutcompetition for unlimited resources.gradual warming of Earth.genetic variation in species.asexual reproduction in species.
In which of these investigations would pictures from a camera be most useful?studying bird callsstudying exothermic reactionsstudying the growth of plantsstudying the diffusion of molecules
Of the examples listed, which event is thought by scientists to have led to the greatest extinction?a volcano in Hawaii eruptingthe construction of the Hoover Damwhalers of the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuriesthe Mississippi River flooding its banks each summer
The human stomach is protected from self-digestion by a layer ofbile.mucus.muscle.white blood cells.
On a field trip, a student holds a frog and reports that it has slippery skin. This is an example ofa measurementa predictionan explanationan observation
What most likely happens to soil when crops are not rotated from year to year?The soil nutrients are depleted.The soil fertility increases.The soil becomes more porous.The soil erodes less rapidly.
Materials must pass through a cell's semi-permeable membrane in order for energy to be utilized. This process is calleddiffusion.oxidation.respiration.reproduction.
What is a decomposer?a living thing that breaks down dead organismsa living thing that makes its own foodan animal that eats live plantsan animal that hunts other animals
Modern technology has had some positive and negative effects on society. Which would be a negative effect of advances in technology?human jobs replaced by more efficient machinesdecrease in production of solid wasteuse of alternate sources of energyreduction in habitat destruction
Which of the following allows a cell to become specialized?location of the cell in the bodyfunction of the cell in the bodydifferent patterns of gene expressiondifferent combinations of genes in the nucleus
Which tool would be best to use for counting the number of legs on an ant?rulerhand lenscalculatormicroscope
A dragonfly develops through incomplete metamorphosis. Which stages does the dragonfly's life cycle include?egg and larvaegg and nymphlarva and pupalarva and nymph
When a cold front moves over a land region that has warm, moist air, a transfer of energy occurs. Cold air sinks and pushes warmer air upward. As energy is removed from the air, which change will most likely take place?Ozone in the atmosphere will decrease.Less ultraviolet radiation will reach the land.More water will be absorbed from the area lakes.Water in the atmosphere will undergo a phase change.
Which sequence lists the levels of organization in the human body from simplest to most complex?organ system -> tissue -> cell -> organtissue -> cell -> organ -> organ systemorgan -> organ system -> tissue -> cellcell -> tissue -> organ -> organ system
Cancer is best described asa type of genetic engineeringthe merging of sex cellsabnormal cell divisiontissue that stops growing
To pump blood through the body, the heart must overcome the force of gravity. Which body position would require the least work from the heart?sittingstandingkneelinglying down
In order to grow two of the exact same plants, a person would reproduce them asexually because thegenetic diversity is greater.offspring would be genetically identical.recessive traits would emerge.negative traits are suppressed.
In flowering plants, what structure containing DNA is transported from one plant to another?nectarchlorophyllglucosepollen
Several interchangeable parts are used in the manufacture of automobiles. Some examples of these parts are batteries, windshield wiper blades, spark plugs, and tires. Which of the following is an advantage of interchangeable parts over non-interchangeable parts on automobiles?Interchangeable parts are generally more expensive than custom-made parts for automobiles.Interchangeable parts break more often now than in years past on most automobiles.Interchangeable parts are plentiful for custom-made automobiles.Interchangeable parts can fit many kinds of automobiles.
Which of the following represents a chemical reaction?a sugar cube dissolving in water.ice cubes forming in a freezer.ice cream melting in a bowl.a cake baking in an oven.
When a hammer strikes a nail, the nailexerts balanced forces that helps it from moving.exerts a force equal to the weight of the hammer.exerts an unbalanced force that changes its velocity.exerts an equal and opposite force back on the hammer.
Which of these natural events occurs at time intervals that are the most regular?drought and floodinghigh tides and low tidesclear skies and cloudy skieshot weather and cool weather
A student combined rice cereal with melted marshmallows. Which best describes what the student made?an atoma mixturea moleculean element
Brittany pedaled her bicycle quickly on a level surface. When she stopped pedaling and coasted, the bicycle slowed and came to a stop. What happened to the energy of the moving bicycle as it coasted to a stop?It was transferred to heat due to friction.It was reabsorbed into Brittany's muscles.It was stored in the bicycle wheels as potential energy.It was transferred to the air in the form of visible light.
Homes that are built to be environmentally friendly because they use energy more efficiently than other homes are called "green" homes. "Green" homes often have reflective roofs and walls made of recycled materials. The windows in these energy-saving homes are double-paned, meaning each window has two pieces of glass. Double-paned windows have a layer of air between the window panes. This layer is a barrier against extreme temperatures and saves energy. A solar panel on a "green" home useschemical energymechanical energya renewable energy sourcea nonrenewable energy source
Which process occurs when rocks and soil slide down a mountain?erosionmigrationrecyclingmaintenance
Tony is studying ladybugs in a garden. Which of these would BEST help Tony to count the spots on a ladybug?StopwatchThermometerMeasuring cupMagnifying glass
Which is a physical property of an apple?what color it ishow pretty it ishow much it costswhen it was picked
Repeated pesticide use on an insect population can result in some of the insects becoming resistant to that pesticide over time. Which process is responsible for the pesticides no longer being effective on the insects?divergent evolutionnatural selectionbottleneck effectselective breeding
A boy pulls a sweater off over his head. His hair is attracted to the sweater due toa magnetic forcea heat transfera chemical changean electrical charge
In some communities, forests are cleared through burning, and the deforested land is used for farming. Which of these is a negative consequence of this practice?decreased plant and animal diversityincreased availability of soil nutrientsgreater access to water for plants and animalsless sunlight reaching the ground
Some plant cells are coated in a waxy layer that prevents water loss. This specialization is found in which plant cells?internal stem cellsinternal root cellscells on the plant surfacecells in the plant reproductive system
Scientists recorded the hourly temperature at a weather station for the month of July and want to quickly measure a trend over time in temperature changes. Which of these formats would be the most appropriate representation of the temperature data to quickly measure any trend?bar graphline graphpie chartdata table
A factory in Japan had been dumping mercury into Minamata Bay. Certain microorganisms in the water were able to change the mercury into a form that the plankton could use. Which most likely happened next?The organisms built up a resistance to the mercury.The mercury passed through the food chain.The plankton made the mercury safe.The fish would not eat the plankton.
Students conducted an investigation with green bananas. They hypothesized that an onion placed near a banana could increase the rate at which the banana ripened. They placed one onion and one banana in each of three containers. In a fourth container they placed a banana, but no onion. Which statement best explains why the onion was left out of the fourth container?The onion would contaminate the fourth trial.The container without the onion is the control.Three containers with onions are enough to conduct the test.The container without the onion is the independent variable.
When cold weather freezes water in the cracks of rocks, which would most likely happen?The rocks would become rounded.The rocks would be used for shelter.The rocks would be moved by the wind.The rocks would break into smaller pieces.
What would best regulate the temperature of an overheated body?a decrease in sweatinga decrease in the breathing ratea dilation of blood vessels in the skinan increase in heart rate
The surface of Earth is constantly changing. Which of these findings provides the best evidence that the crustal surface of Earth has changed over time?Some rock layers are very thick.Some species have become extinct.Marine fossils are found in mountain areas.Igneous rock is found on all tectonic plates.
Solar radiation is a combination of light with different wavelengths. Which type of ray can harm human skin the most?infraredmicrowaveultravioletvisible
Water is often put through a treatment system before it is used in homes as drinking water. Which is the most likely reason water is treated before people drink it?to remove harmful substancesto add colorto increase its supplyto decrease its temperature
How can plants most likely improve air quality?by absorbing nutrientsby producing oxygenby producing sugarby absorbing water
A condition in bees called "colony collapse disorder" occurs when worker bees leave the hive to collect nectar and never return. How would a decline in the bee population most likely affect a farm ecosystem?There would be a decrease in soil thickness.There would be a decline in fruit production.There would be an increase in plant diseases.There would be an increase in insect pest populations.
How are animals that prey on other animals classified?herbivorescarnivoresautotrophsdecomposers
Which process will separate the sugar from a mixture of sugar and water?Stirring the mixtureEvaporating the waterAdding more waterAdding more sugar
Which movement of carbon between reservoirs takes the longest to achieve?from burning coal to the atmospherefrom plant tissues to coal in the crustfrom the atmosphere to the sugars in plantsfrom the respiration of fish to the ocean waters
Which types of objects are most easily seen by the human eye?objects that reflect most of the light that strikes themobjects that refract most of the light that strikes themobjects that diffract most of the light that strikes themobjects that absorb most of the light that strikes them
Planting legumes in order to add nitrogen to soil most likely causesa decrease in the amount of acid rain.an enrichment in the fertility of the soil.an increase in the ratio of nitrogen to oxygen in the system.a reduction in the soil's ability to manufacture its own nitrogen.
Earth is about 81 times more massive than the Moon. How will the mass and weight of a rocket on the Moon compare to its mass and weight on Earth?The mass and weight will be less on the Moon.The mass and weight will be greater on the Moon.The mass will be the same, but its weight will be less on the Moon.The mass will be the same, but its weight will be greater on the Moon.
Louis Pasteur discovered a process that allows milk to be stored in sealed containers for long periods of time without spoiling. The process, called pasteurization, involves heating the milk before placing it in the sealed containers.Which is the best explanation of how pasteurization works?Heat strengthens molecules that prevent spoiling.The chemical structure of the food changes with the heat.Heat killed microorganisms that could cause spoiling.The food particles are better mixed after heating.
Which characteristic would best help a land animal survive in a cold Arctic climate?thick furlarge earssmooth feetslender body
What is the most reasonable explanation for why a toy car rolls farther on a wood floor than on a thick carpet?The car weighs more on the carpet.The car weighs more on the floor.The carpet has more resistance.The floor has more traction.
What part of the scientific method involves measuring the growth of a plant over a one-month period?analysisobservationconclusionhypothesis
Which statement on a toothpaste package best supports the claim of fighting cavities?delivers great new flavorpatented triple cleansing actionguaranteed to make teeth sparklecertified by the American Dental Association
Which is a chemical compound?aluminumcarbonated watersodium chloridecarbon-14
Which of these human activities in a forest has a positive effect on the ecosystem?Clearing the land to build new homesPlanting new trees where old ones were cut downBuilding a new highway through the areaCutting down trees to make farmland
Which is an example of water condensing?A puddle disappearing on a hot summer afternoonSweat forming on your forehead after you do a lot of exerciseIce cubes melting when you put them out in the sunDew forming on plants during a cold night
Gregor Mendel studied ratios related to traits passed from parent pea plants to offspring pea plants. Mendel used large numbers of plants to avoid "sampling error." This changed the way scientists studied genetics because it included ideas ofnuclei and DNA.atoms and molecules.ecology and environment.mathematics and probability.
What season is the Northern Hemisphere experiencing when it is tilted directly toward the Sun?fallwinterspringsummer
Which species have been on the Earth for the shortest amount of time?HumansInsectsFishReptiles
Which tool should be used to compare the growth of an algal colony growing in a petri dish?a scalea rulera hand lensa balance scale
Use The Periodic Table of the Elements and the information below to answer the question. Magnesium metal (Mg) is grayish-white in color and reacts actively with water. Fluorine (F2) is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature and is a member of the halogen family. These two elements react to produce magnesium fluoride (MgF2), a chemical commonly used in making windows and lenses. How do the elements magnesium (Mg) and fluorine (F2) produce the compound magnesium fluoride (MgF2)?by nuclear connectionby physically combiningby magnetic connectionby chemically combining
Male barn swallow birds with symmetrically-shaped wings find mates more quickly than males with asymmetrical wing shapes. Which statement best explains the significance of symmetry in the barn swallow population?Symmetrical wings are attractive to females.Symmetrical wings indicate genetic mutations.Symmetrical wings indicate that males are good predators.Symmetrical wings are signs that a bird is very aggressive.
Which of the following would be most useful for calculating the density of a rock sample?microscope and balancegraduated cylinder and balancemicroscope and graduated cylinderbeaker and graduated cylinder
Which object in our solar system reflects light and is a satellite that orbits around one planet?EarthMercurythe Sunthe Moon
Students stir salt, sand, sawdust, and seashells into a jar filled with water. Which of the materials will form a solution?salt and watersand and sawdustseashells and watersawdust and seashells
Which scale is used to report the intensity of an earthquake?Saffir-Simpson ScaleModified Mercalli ScaleRichter Magnitude ScaleMoment Magnitude Scale
What is the outermost structure in a plant cell?cell membranecytoplasmcell wallchloroplast
The main source of food for a coyote population in one area is mice. Which is most likely to happen to these coyotes if a new predator begins eating the mice?There will be fewer coyotes.The coyotes will produce more young.More coyotes will arrive from other locations.Each coyote will spend less time hunting food.
The best example of heat transfer by convection is whensunlight warms soil.a ceiling fan blows air.flames heat up a pan.heat rises in a chimney.
A worker needs to load a heavy box onto a truck. The worker uses a ramp to move the box because the rampincreases the weight of the box.reduces the gravitational force on the box.increases the amount of friction on the box.reduces the amount of force applied to the box.
A fox grows thicker fur as a season changes. This adaptation helps the fox tofind foodkeep warmergrow strongerescape from predators
What is the main source of raw material for the production of plastics?clayplantspetroleumsand
The students in an engineering class built a robot that stacks wooden blocks. A built-in computer controls the movement of the robot. The computer in the robot performs a function most similar to which part of the human body?lungsheartbrainarms
When sugar is heated on a hot plate, it turns into a liquid. When the liquid sugar is cooled, a hard-crystalline substance is formed. This model best demonstrates the formation ofmolten rocks.igneous rocks.sedimentary rocks.metamorphic rocks.
Which distance is the smallest for which it is most practical to use the light-year as a unit of measurement?the distance between Earth and its Moonthe distance between Jupiter and the Sunthe distance between the Milky Way and the nearest galaxythe distance between the Sun and the center of the Milky Way
Which of the following devices relies on electromagnetic radiation in the radio wave region of the spectrum for operation?sun tanning lampelectric light bulbcellular telephoneelectric toaster
When a tree suffers from a decreased ability to transport materials within the phloem, what is directly impacted?volume of water in the xylemflow of necessary nutrientsresponse to environmental factorsrate of photosynthesis in leaves
Strontium, barium, and radium are grouped together on the Periodic Table of the Elements because they all havea bright silver and white coloring.similar electron configurations.strong radioactive properties.few or no stable isotopes.
An example of a poor health habit istaking a bath or shower regularlyhandwashing after using the bathroomplaying on a soccer teameating candy instead of lunch
What type of inheritance controls blood types in humans?incomplete dominancepolygenic inheritancemultiple allelesrecessive genes
Minerals can be identified using hardness, streak, and cleavage becauseminerals are inorganic.crystal structure is too hard to determine.crystal size is determined by the environment.minerals have different recognizable properties.
What is the process that produces energy in the Sun for billions of years?fissionfusionsolar windssolar radiation
Which statement is an opinion?Chemistry and Physics are major branches of science.Life Science is a subject filled with interesting information.Geology and Oceanography are subjects in Earth Science.Biology is a science that studies complex organisms.
Decomposers are organisms that obtain their food from dead organisms. Which of these would be classified as decomposers?algae, plantssnakes, wolves, whalesdeer, rabbits, micebacteria, fungi
DNA molecules contain the genetic information that determines the characteristics of a living organism. How do DNA molecules express the genetic information they contain?by breaking down proteins within the cellby directing the process of protein synthesisby regulating the storage of cellular proteinsby controlling the movement of protein molecules
Fossil fuels were formed fromvolcanoesthe remains of living thingsgases in the atmospherewater trapped inside rocks
Which of the following remains constant in Earth's carbon cycle?the total mass of available carbonthe way organisms use carbonthe physical state of carbon-containing moleculesthe molecule in which a particular carbon atom is found
Which invention has technology that helps people keep food fresh for a long period of time?dishwasherrefrigeratorelectric mixermicrowave oven
A student is designing a model of the solar system and writing a report. She is trying to be as accurate as possible. Which statement should she include in her report?The distance between the Sun and Earth is measured in light years.Jupiter and Uranus are considered to be terrestrial planets.The asteroid belt is located between Jupiter and Saturn.The orbit of Mars is similar to the orbit of Saturn.
Stacey picks apples and puts them in a basket. When she puts her basket on a scale, the scale reads two kilograms (kg). What property is Stacey measuring?heightweighttemperaturevolume
Which feature is a physical property of copper?insulates heatconducts electricitystrong magnetic forceliquid at room temperature
Which term describes Earth's orbit around the Sun?dayrevolutionmonthrotation
How do the waxy stem covering and needle-shaped leaves improve the ability of a cactus to survive in the desert?They make the plant appetizing to small desert animals.They prevent the loss of oxygen through photosynthesis.They reduce the loss of water from the plant to the air.They provide the storage space for different types of minerals.
Which characteristic of a cell membrane allows it to control materials entering and leaving a cell?A cell membrane is surrounded by fluid.A cell membrane is semipermeable.A cell membrane holds organelles in place.A cell membrane is found in plant and animal cells.
Which statement about all living organisms is true?They have limbs.They produce their own food.They breathe air.They have at least one cell.
The length of daylight changes as the seasons change during the year. What causes these changes in daylight?Earth's tilt on its axisthe Sun's tilt on its axisEarth spinning on its axisthe Sun spinning on its axis
The populations of black rhinoceroses have been impacted by human interactions to the point of being endangered. Which interaction best explains why the black rhino is now endangered?over huntingwater pollutionairborne diseasesincreased deforestation
A student had a cup of ice while working outside. After a while, the ice melted because the Sun emits energy in the form of light andelectricity.heat.magnetism.sound.
What characteristic of viruses distinguishes them from cells?They do not have hereditary material.They are not separated from their environments.They lack an independent metabolism.Their traits do not evolve in response to selection pressures.
The energy required to lift an object is supplied by ATP derived from the breakdown of molecules ofglutamate.glycerol.glycolysis.glucose.
Living cells synthesize long chains of amino acids called proteins. Which substance provides the information needed to correctly sequence the amino acids during protein synthesis?ATPmRNAtRNADNA
Which of these makes it possible for hurricanes to form?water depthwater claritywater salinitywater temperature
Most types of cacti survive the dry conditions of a desert because they hold water in their stems. This is an example ofa niche.a species.an adaptation.an ecosystem.
High-altitude cirrus clouds are primarily formed from which substance?carbon dioxide gassolid ice crystalsnitrogen compoundsozone molecules
During a lab investigation a scientist heats a solid substance. The scientist observes that the solid has two different melting points. The scientist is able to separate the two resulting liquids. Which statement best classifies the original solid substance?It was an atom.It was a mixture.It was an element.It was a compound.
Over a long period of time, some flowering plants have become dependent on honey bees to fertilize their seeds. In recent years, a form of mite has infected and killed the honey bees in many areas of the country. Since this has happened, the once bee-dependent plants with the best chance of surviving are those thatgrow taller so that the few remaining honey bees will find them.change their flowers so that wind will fertilize them.have always attracted many other insects as well as honey bees.have seeds that stay alive for a long time in the environment.
Which landforms are most like hills but are much taller?cavesmountainsplainsvalleys
What is the basic unit of life?atomcellelementnucleus
About how many Earth days does it take the Moon to travel around Earth?127180365
Students studying the atmosphere want to display the percentage of each greenhouse gas as compared to the total amount of greenhouse gases found in the atmosphere. Which representation would be most appropriate for displaying these percentages?bar graphline graphpie chartdata table
The Himalayan Mountain chain is the youngest and tallest mountain chain on Earth. Which phenomenon contributed most to this area of continental buildup?erosion of surrounding continental materialseruptions of continental shield volcanoesconvergence of continental platessubsidence of continental landmass
A large cold front is moving past the school on a hot, humid summer day. Which best describes the type of weather as the cold front passes by?A droughtA monsoonA hurricaneA thunderstorm
Growth and repair in multicellular organisms are the result ofexcretionlocomotioncell divisiondecomposition
A girl signals her friend by shining a flashlight on a mirror. Her friend can see the signal becauseheat energy can be transferred from one object to anothermechanical energy can be transferred from one object to anothersound energy can be reflected from one object to anotherlight energy can be reflected from one object to another
If a wooded area is cleared and corn is planted, what will MOST likely happen?Animal habitats will be destroyed.The air will become polluted.Weather patterns will change.Underground streams will get polluted.
Warm water contains less dissolved oxygen than colder water. Which population will be most affected by a long period of hot, dry days?fish in pondsfish in oceansplants in lakesplants in streams
Which of the following is most responsible for the decay of dead organisms?watermammalsmicroorganismsnitrogen
When a book is dropped onto a wooden desk, the molecules in the wood begin to vibrate from the force of the book. Which of these is produced by the vibrations?frictioninterferencesound wavesultrasonic waves
In 1976, the Viking I Lander was sent to Mars to analyze atmospheric gases and soil samples. The Viking I Lander was most likely aspace probe.space shuttle.lunar module.natural satellite.
Which action forms a different chemical substance?crushing a rockburning a piece of woodmixing salt and peppermelting an ice cube
Why do dogs have most of the characteristics of their parents?They inherit them from their parents.They live in the same habitats as their parents.They learn them by observing their parents.They eat the same foods as their parents.
Which describes a specific characteristic necessary for survival in the desert?conserving waterhiding from predatorshibernating for long periodsproducing many offspring
Frogs lay eggs that develop into tadpoles and then into adult frogs. This sequence of changes is an example of how living thingsgo through a life cycleform a food webact as a source of foodaffect other parts of the ecosystem
Quartz and feldspar are two common minerals. When they are found mixed together in nature they formrocks.magma.soil deposits.organic material.
Atoms of which of these elements are part of many organic molecules?calciummagnesiumoxygensilicon
Which object is the best conductor of electricity?metal forkrubber bootplastic spoonwooden bat
An element with which property would be best to use in electrical wiring?insulatorconductormalleableporous
A large rock breaks into small pieces within 10 years. Which process is most likely responsible for breaking the large rock into small pieces within 10 years?steady winds blowing throughout the yearsgentle rain falling during each spring and falllack of rain falling during a four-year droughtwater repeatedly freezing and thawing in a crack
Paco throws a ball. What force pulls the ball down toward the ground?frictiongravityinertiamomentum
Which is a unit of measure for length?metersdegreesmillilitersatmospheres
Movement of Earth's crust along plate boundaries producesfrontstideshurricanesearthquakes
The praying mantis is well camouflaged in its natural habitat. What is a benefit of this adaptation?It increases the mutation rate of favorable genes.It reduces the risk of being eaten by a predator.It allows absorption of chlorophyll from plants.It improves the chances of finding a mate.
The Greek philosopher Aristotle described matter with the phrase "unable to be divided." The modern concept that grew from Aristotle's idea is theatom.proton.neutron.electron.
Paleontologists often find and study the remains of ancient plants and animals. When the remains of ancient plants and animals are covered by layers of sediment over time, the remainsmeltdissolvebecome a fossilevaporate into vapor
What are the basic structural units of living organisms?cellsnucleiorganstissues
A student is visiting a local limestone quarry and finds fossils of seashells. The quarry is located hundreds of miles from the ocean. The fossils best indicate thatthis area was once below sea level.global temperature changed over time.erosion took place after a flood.volcanic activity affected the area.
What happens to metal railroad tracks during the heat of a summer day?decrease in weightincrease in weightdecrease in lengthincrease in length
Jake is testing how light affects plant growth. He grows two plants in identical pots with the same amount of water and fertilizer. Jake grows one of the plants in the sun, and the other in the shade. Which part of Jake's process indicates that there is a control for this investigation?He is growing plants in identical pots.He is using the same amount of water.He is growing one plant out of the sun.He is using the same amount of fertilizer.
Which stage of a frog's life cycle can be compared to a plant seed growing into a new plant?when frog eggs are laid in waterwhen frog eggs hatch into tadpoleswhen tadpoles live in water and breathe with gillswhen frogs use lungs for breathing out of water
Which of these elements is likely to be found in an organic compound?heliumhydrogenmercurytin
What statement describes what happens to the carbon dioxide waste produced by a developing baby during pregnancy?It is carried by the umbilical cord to the placenta and then to the mother's blood.It is released from the fetus by its breathing and then is absorbed by the placenta.It is released through the fetal urine and then exits through the umbilical cord.It is carried through shared blood vessels and then to the mother's lungs.
Which part of the atom has a negative charge?neutronnucleuselectronproton
Which is a learned behavior?A dog uses its tongue to drink.A robin holds a branch with its feet.A chimpanzee digs for termites with a stick.A worm moves to the top of flooded ground.
Organisms that reproduce asexually generally have offspring that areunicellular.multicellular.genetically varied.genetically identical.
Crows are found throughout many parts of the world. They are black birds with excellent hearing. In the wild they live for six to seven years. Some crows in Japan open hard-shelled nuts by dropping them in front of moving cars. Which of these is a learned behavior?Having excellent hearingLiving six to seven yearsDropping nuts in front of carsHaving black feathers
Which object would best help a student determine if a block of an unknown material is magnetic?wooden rulerpaper clipglass marblemagnifying glass
About how much of Earth's surface is covered by oceans?less than 20%about 50%about 70%more than 90%
Sound will not travel in asolidliquidgasvacuum
What supplies most of the energy that plants need to make food?rainwindmineralssunlight
Which of the following is the main role of flowers found on most flowering plants?to take in airto produce seedsto absorb nutrientsto protect the stem
Which adaptation will warn predators not to eat an animal?bright colorsbulging eyesgeometric shapespoisonous secretions
The cones of a jack pine tree require great amounts of heat to release their seeds. When are jack pine tree seeds most likely released?during a floodafter a fireduring a droughtafter a disease
When a thin slice from an onion is viewed through a microscope, lots of little box-like shapes are seen. These shapes are most likelyatoms.dust.cells.bubbles.
Which is an example of substances reacting chemically?iron and oxygen forming rustpaper being cut into small pieceschocolate melting in a panflour and sugar mixed together in a bowl
An object's hardness, taste, and texture are examples ofprinciplesstagespropertiesprocesses
Some objects conduct electricity. Which object is the best conductor of electricity?a metal forka wood spoona plastic comba rubber eraser
Which of the following eras is known as the "Age of Mammals"?PrecambrianPaleozoicMesozoicCenozoic
In Alaska, there are fewer hours of daylight in the winter than in the summer. Which statement best explains why this difference occurs?The Sun burns hotter in the summer.The Sun moves below the horizon in the summer.The Northern Hemisphere is closer to the Sun in the winter.The Northern Hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun in the winter.
Most of Earth's major earthquakes are caused byseasonal heating and cooling of Earth's surfaceweathering of rock at Earth's surfaceEarth's gravitational attraction to the Moonfaulting of rock in Earth's crust
A girl with long hair is going to be participating in an experiment that uses an alcohol burner for an energy source. What is the best thing for her to do to prepare for this experiment?leave her large jacket in her locker for the dayuse goggles during the experimenttie her hair back away from her facewear a lab apron during the experiment
Which factor would have the greatest influence on the southern migration of animals living in the Northern Hemisphere?strong stormslong periods of droughtcold air temperaturesincreasing daylight hours
What carries oxygen throughout the body?white blood cellsbrainred blood cellsnerves
Which is the best example of an inherited behavior?a bear knowing the best place to catch salmona cat clawing on a tree to sharpen its clawsa dog coming when it hears a bella horse trotting its way back to the barn
What do all animals need in order to survive?rocks, water, and soilwater, air, and foodair, rocks, and sunlightfood, soil, and sunlight
Estella spilled tomato sauce on her shirt. When she washed her shirt, she noticed that the detergent she used contained enzymes. Enzymes are added to detergents to break down proteins from food and other substances that may stain clothing. Which would most likely inhibit the ability of the enzymes to remove the stain on her shirt?the amount of dissolved minerals in the waterthe type of fibers from which her shirt was madethe temperature of the waterthe fragrances in the detergent
Which of the following best describes an atom?protons and electrons grouped together in a random patternprotons and electrons grouped together in an alternating patterna core of protons and neutrons surrounded by electronsa core of electrons and neutrons surrounded by protons
At a weightlifting competition, two competitors lifted the same weight to the same height. The second competitor accomplished the lift 2 seconds faster than the first competitor. This demonstrated that the second competitor had moreenergy than the first.inertia than the first.power than the first.work than the first.
The fur color of a bear varies with its environment. Polar bears found in the Arctic have white fur, while black bears found in Pennsylvania have dark fur. Which best describes the variation of fur color amongst the bear species?modified characteristicecological successionstructural adaptationselective breeding
A car has a small gasoline engine combined with a battery-powered electric motor. When the car stops at a red light, the gasoline engine stops running and the electric motor begins working. How does this type of car most likely benefit people?reduces trafficuses less gasolineaccelerates fastercarries more passengers
Increased populations can lead to the depletion of locally available resources. Compared to other communities, which of these locally available resources is most likely to be depleted in desert communities?mineraloxygengasolinewater
Where is the first place a scientist should present new research data about the structure of a galaxy in order to receive the most appropriate review of the research?a high school science classrooma university science bloga peer-reviewed science journala popular science news magazine
Which action most likely causes large rocks to become smaller pieces of rock?melting inside of Earthweathering by wind and watercementing by mud and mineralsbeing pressed between layers of soil
European starlings are birds that take over the nests of other birds. When they move into an area, starlings reproduce quickly. Taking over the nests of other birds most likely increases the number of starlings by helping them to do what?attract a better matecompete for resourcesmigrate during the winterblend in with the environment
Many bacteria are decomposer organisms. Which of the following statements best describes how these bacteria help make soil more fertile?The bacteria break down water into food.The bacteria change sunlight into minerals.The bacteria combine with sand to form rocks.The bacteria break down plant and animal matter.
In Rutherford's experiment, what caused some high-energy particles to bounce off the metal, while most pass straight through?light wavesmagnetic wavespositive chargesnegative charges
Jenny's class made an instrument to measure air pressure. The instrument is athermometer.rain gauge.barometer.wind vane.
Condensation in the water cycle can best be described as the result of water vaporrising into the atmosphere, cooling and changing into a liquid form.rising into the atmosphere, warming and changing into a gaseous form.changing from a liquid form into a solid and forming snow.changing from a gas form into a solid and forming hail.
New carpet is being measured for a room that is 5.5 m by 4.6 m. On a measuring tape, what is the smallest unit that is necessary to measure the room accurately for the carpet?millimeterscentimetersmeterskilometers
How does an ecosystem benefit when leaves fall from a tree and decompose on the soil?Nutrients are released into the soil.Soil erosion decreases.Carbon dioxide is absorbed by the soil.Soil temperature decreases.
Which of the following gases do plants use in photosynthesis?hydrogenoxygencarbon dioxidecarbon monoxide
During an ice age, enormous ice sheets called glaciers increase in size on Earth's surface, resulting in decreased ocean depths. Due to global cooling, the water cycle is disrupted between which two stages to cause an increase in glacier size?runoff and evaporationtranspiration and precipitationprecipitation and runofftranspiration and evaporation
Different units of measurement are more useful in some settings than in others. Which unit of measurement is most used when comparing distances within the solar system?the milethe kilometerthe light yearthe astronomical unit
The formation of diamonds requires tremendous pressure that is generatedin deep ocean trenches.high in the mountains.in dry environments.deep below the crust.
What characteristic helps a rabbit survive in a winter environment?sizestrengthlong earscamouflage
A science class is taking a field trip to a forest to observe and study birds. Which tool would be most helpful for observing birds?beakersbinocularssafety gogglesmicroscopes
An example of an instinct islaughing at something funny.dogs doing tricks when told.doing your homework at the same time each day.salmon returning to their birthplace to lay their eggs.
During which change of state do the particles of a substance move from being tightly packed together to having more freedom of movement?a solid becoming a liquida gas becoming a solida gas becoming a liquida liquid becoming a solid
When astronauts walked on the Moon, they used weighted boots to help them walk due to the lower gravitational pull. What difference between Earth and the Moon accounts for the difference in gravity?densitydiametermassvolume
A population of wood mice lives in a cool, moist temperate forest. Several years of hot, dry weather have affected the plants in the area. Which mice in the population are most likely to survive this change and pass their genes on to their offspring?those with the warmest coats and best camouflagethe largest and strongest mice in the populationthose with traits most adapted to the new environmentthe youngest and fastest mice in the population
Harmful ultraviolet rays from the Sun are primarily absorbed bydust.ozone.land masses.water vapor.
Which of these is most likely caused by the action of water, wind, and animals?mountainserosionearthquakesvolcanic eruptions
The core of Earth is divided into two layers. The outer core is made ofbasaltic rocks.silicate rocks.solid iron and nickel.molten iron and nickel.
Offshore oil platforms affect ocean habitats. An ocean environment is most likely damaged by an offshore oil platform becauseleaking oil from the oil platform might pollute the waterfishing from the oil platform might reduce the fish populationdrilling in the ocean floor might reduce the water temperaturechanging the ocean floor might increase the number of hurricanes
An object such as a hammer weighs less on the Moon than on Earth. This is because the Moon has athinner atmosphere than Earth.smaller diameter than Earth.stronger magnetic field than Earth.lower mass than Earth.
A scientist plans a project to determine the effect of rain on the formation of caves. An area of rock has been chosen as the site for the investigation. How often should the scientist measure the changes in the rock?every dayevery weekevery monthevery year
Which type of rock is formed from limestone that has been compacted, heated, and recrystallized?siltstonesandstonemarbleshale
Isabel goes jogging for two miles on a sunny afternoon. At the end of her run, she is warmer. As Isabel jogs, which function does the skin perform to help stabilize her body temperature?Her skin exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide.Her skin produces red blood cells.Her skin releases hormones.Her skin discharges water.
Which cell can survive without the help of other cells?leaf cellyeast cellonion cellmuscle cell
Two students make hot chocolate. One student pours the hot chocolate into a foam cup. The other student pours the hot chocolate into a metal cup. The metal cup becomes too hot to touch, but the foam cup can be held comfortably. The best explanation for this difference in temperature is that the foam cup-- A heats up much faster than the metal cuphas a higher specific heat than the metal cupis a better conductor of heat than the metal cuphas a specific heat that is similar to that of the metal cup
Frogs and salamanders compete with each other for insects. Both frogs and salamanders catch flying insects with their tongues. Which feature would most likely help both animals compete for flying insects?sticky tonguesbright tonguesthick tonguesshort tongues
Which interaction benefits both organisms?a flea living on a doga bee pollinating a flowera tapeworm living inside an animala mosquito biting a person
Which type of rock is formed when limestone is subjected to heat and pressure?sandstonebasaltmarblegranite
Jenny measures the outside temperature as 16 degrees Celsius (°C), 61 degrees Fahrenheit (°F). She observes precipitation falling from the clouds in a solid form. What type of precipitation is Jenny most likely observing?hailrainsleetsnow
A change in the environment that causes a response is known as astimulushabitreflexsource
Aluminum is an element. Which of the following best describes the smallest particle of aluminum that retains all the properties of aluminum?a moleculean atoma protonan electron
What advantage do sea stars gain from having radial symmetry?They reproduce at a faster rate.They digest food more efficiently.They move quickly along the ground.They sense predators and potential food from all directions.
A student has a ball of clay that sinks when placed in a pan of water. Which property should he change to make the clay float?colortexturemassshape
The population of which of the following 26 organisms would most likely decline if small animals like rats, rabbits, and snakes were eliminated from an ecosystem?earthwormsgrasseshawksmushrooms
During a lab investigation, students were asked to determine the best way to clean up an oil spill using different materials. Investigation Materials • filter paper • foam sponge • metal wire screen • thin sock filled with hair The students tested the materials by placing each material into separate buckets containing oil and water. They recorded their observations on which material absorbed the most oil. Why would the students' teacher ask them to repeat their tests?to determine if water and oil can be separatedto learn more about how to protect wildlife during an oil spillto improve the chances of obtaining accurate oil cleanup resultsto increase the total amount of oil removed from each container
A delta can be seen from the air at the mouth of the Mississippi River. This delta was formed byerosion.weathering.conservation of soil.deposition of sediment.
The nose, mouth, and diaphragm are parts of which body system?digestivemuscularcirculatoryrespiratory
Students are studying some leaves. They group the leaves by shape. Which science process are the students using when they put the leaves in different groups?classifyingpredictingmeasuringexperimenting
The thin, semi-permeable membrane that encloses a cell allows nutrients to enter and wastes to bedigested.recycled.protected.excreted.
A small, fast-moving river in is in a V-shaped valley on the slope of a mountain. If you follow the river to where it passes through a plain, what will the river most likely look like compared with how it looked on the mountain?Much the sameDeeper and fasterSlower and widerStraighter
The atmosphere of Mars is almost entirely composed of a greenhouse gas. Compared with Earth, which factor accounts for the low, nighttime surface temperatures on Mars?Mars is much farther from the Sun than Earth.The atmosphere on Mars has an extremely low density.The atmosphere on Mars lacks global circulation.Mars has more glacial activity than Earth.
Asexually produced offspring are geneticallyidentical to the parentdifferent from the parentdifferent from each otherformed by two parents
A teacher asks her students to examine titles of four scientific articles. Which titled article is specifically about a chemical change?How Baking Soda Reacts With VinegarHow Rust Can Be Scraped off of MetalHow Metals Respond to Electrical CurrentsHow Elements Can Change Phase When Heated
Nuclear fusion is the source of energy for stars. Besides hydrogen, which other element is most likely also common in stars?heliumnitrogenoxygenuranium
Plants in a forest need to obtain nutrients from the soil to survive. How do most of the nutrients get back in the soil once the forest plants have used them for growth?Organic matter recycles from dead organisms.Commercial fertilizers are applied by humans.Solar radiation reaches the ground surface.Rainwater drips off of living organisms.
Conjugation in a paramecium differs from sexual reproduction in volvox because conjugationresults in two genetically identical cells.requires specialized gonidia cells.forms haploid male and female gametes.takes place between specialized cells.
Which of the following helps to produce urine in humans and other mammals?bladderurethrakidneysureter
A scientist looks at a graph that shows the percentages of humus, clay, and sand that make up a soil. If the scientist had the total weight of each material, instead of percentages, what type of graph would be best to illustrate the data?bar graphscatterplotcircle graphpictograph
Which unit of measurement describes an object's length?meterkilogramliterdegree
Which organ is part of the respiratory system?stomachlungsspinal cordlarge intestines
The iron in iron-rich red soils may not be in a form that can be taken up by tree roots. As a result, leaves and needles may look yellow. Some trees release acids that convert iron in soil to a usable form. This change in soil chemistry is a type of which process?depositionweatheringprecipitationphotosynthesis
The action that results when waves made in a pond strike the edges and bounce back is known asamplitude.frequency.vibration.reflection.
Sleet and hail are forms ofcloudsenergyevaporationprecipitation
Astronomers have determined the surface temperature of stars by studying their colors. What color emission represents stars with the hottest temperatures?blueredwhiteyellow
Because sulfur cannot be decomposed by simple chemical methods into two or more different substances, it is classified asan element.a compound.a mixture.a molecule.
The students watch ocean waves crash on a beach. Which statement describes what will most likely happen because of the waves?Grass on the beach will grow longer.Sand from the beach will wash away.Salt from the ocean will be left on the beach.Currents in the ocean will become stronger.
When plants and animals die, which organisms help return nutrients to the food chain?decomposerspredatorspreyproducers
Which object used in an experiment can safely be recycled?an aluminum cana wet paper towelsalt spilled onto a tabletopa broken graduated cylinder
Evidence that living things have evolved over hundreds of millions of years can be found inparticles in the airrocks containing fossilstree rings from recently logged treeschemicals in human hair
What causes the blue color of the sky?emission of light by land and water surfacesreflection of light from land and water surfacesabsorption of light by matter in the atmospherescattering of light by matter in the atmosphere
As the population of small fish in a lake decreases, the population of large fish that depend on the small fish for food willreproduce fasterbegin to produce their own fooddecrease in numberincrease in number
Living organisms require energy for biological processes. Chemical energy in a plant cell isproduced in vacuoles.converted from solar energy.developed by centrioles.stored as kinetic energy.
Pollen is necessary for a flowering plant togrow.blossom.germinate.reproduce.
Which gas makes up the greatest percentage of Earth's atmosphere?argonnitrogennitrous oxidecarbon dioxide
Which is the best explanation of the term ecology?the study of the nonliving parts of the environmentthe study of the living parts of the environmentthe study of the protection and renewal of natural resourcesthe study of organisms and their interactions with the environment
A student leaves a rock in the Sun on a bright afternoon. An hour after sunset, the weather is cool, but the rock still feels warm. The student has demonstrated a property of the rock resulting directly from which of the rock's other properties?its reactivityits magnetismits specific heatits chemical energy
Which characteristic is not an inherited trait?sizeeye colorskin colorpersonality
Eating leafy vegetables is important for human health. This is because leafy vegetables are a good source of which of the following?proteincarbohydratesmineralsfat
What is necessary to use on a telescope in order to photograph solar flares and solar prominences?a light filtera chronographan electric drivea series of mirrors
Near Earth's equator, water generally exists naturally in the liquid and gas states. In which other part of Earth is water usually found naturally in only two states?Indian Oceaninterior of AfricaSouth PoleTropic of Cancer
A cat jumps when startled by a loud noise. This is an example of an organismsensing and responding to its external environmentsensing and responding to its internal environmentchanging and controlling its external environmentchanging and controlling its internal environment
Which of the following materials would best slow the transfer of heat?aluminumcopperglasswood
What can cause a moving object to increase its speed in a forward direction?a force pushing on the object from the opposite directiona force that continually acts on the object in the direction the object is movingan increase in the mass of the objecta decrease in the mass of the object
In which oceanic zone do clams and crabs survive by burrowing in the sand?oceanicintertidaldeep oceanopen ocean
A manufacturing industry has asked to relocate its plant to your town. From an environmental perspective, which question is least important to ask before deciding whether the industry may move to your town?How will the plant affect wildlife of the area?What kinds of pollution will the plant produce?What impact will the plant have on the population of the town?What are the uses of the products that the plant will manufacture?
Some meteorologists use visual aids such as diagrams, maps, and charts when they present the weather to television viewers. How do different types of visual aids help the viewers understand complex weather phenomena?by combining knowledge from past reports with new informationby providing information collected by other meteorologistsby checking the accuracy of each part of the weather reportby showing many components that impact the weather
Which renewable energy resource possesses the greatest potential for providing renewable energy to meet the future needs of the southern United States?tidalwatersolarcoal
A student performs an experiment and the results are shown below: Before- Iron filings are brown, small, and magnetic: Copper sulfate crystals are blue, brittle, and not magnetic. After- The copper formed was reddish, solid, and not magnetic: Iron sulfide solution was colorless and not magnetic. Which statement supports that a chemical reaction took place?Changes in color occurred.A new substance was formed.A physical change in the iron occurred.The original substances were present after.
In order for rocks to be classified as igneous, the rocks mustsolidify at the surface of Earth.be eroded and deposited in layers.be formed from magma.change form when pressure is applied.
Which of these is most likely the cause of a father and son having almost identical-sounding voices?learned behaviorsenvironmental conditionsinherited characteristicsinstinctive characteristics
Frog eggs hatch into tadpoles, and then tadpoles gradually develop into frogs. This process is known asadolescence.crossbreeding.regeneration.metamorphosis.
Many people like to use microwave ovens rather than traditional ovens. The main reason for this is that microwave ovenstake less time to cook food than regular ovens do.get hotter than regular ovens.do not leave spattered grease or food on the inside.cannot overcook food.
When trees are removed from an area in a tropical rainforest, the area experiences an increase in soil erosion. Which statement best explains why removing the trees can lead to soil erosion?Less bedrock will be available to make soil.There will be fewer roots to hold the soil in place.The number of soil-eating insects in the area will increase.The amount of solar radiation reaching the ground will increase.
What information is needed to calculate the speed of a car?the road conditions and type of tiresthe type of engine and the amount of gas used by the enginethe car length and distance traveledthe distance travel
Freda always hangs her wet swimsuit outdoors after getting out of the swimming pool. Which of the following is least likely to affect the rate at which Freda's swimsuit dries?the heat of the Sunthe speed of the windthe temperature of the water in the poolthe amount of water vapor in the air
Maria collected the gas given off by a glowing piece of charcoal. The gas was then bubbled through a small amount of colorless limewater. Part of Maria's report stated, "After the gas was put into the jar, the limewater gradually changed to a milky white color." This statement isan observationa conclusiona generalizationan assumption of the investigationa hypothesis
Some butterflies live an average of two weeks. This period of time is called a lifeprocessspanchangecycle
Which two body systems work together to transport oxygen to the cells?skeletal and respiratorydigestive and respiratoryrespiratory and circulatoryrespiratory and reproductive
Some localized layers of rock contain the element iridium. Iridium is most often found in space objects such as meteoroids and asteroids. The discovery of these iridium-containing layers has been matched to which phenomena in Earth's history?tectonic plate separationsmass species extinctionsorbital path changesmagnetic pole reversals
Which of these converts electrical energy to light energy?a stara flashlighta campfirea tea kettle
Darwin's theory that animal species can change over time was inspired by his research on which set of islands?the Philippine Islandsthe Virgin Islandsthe Hawaiian Islandsthe Galapagos Islands
An athlete is running a race. The athlete's body needs energy. Which organelle(s) in the athlete's cells supply the energy for cellular functions?Golgi apparatusmitochondrionribosomenucleus
Which of these would best help a scientist discover a new planet?making a model of outer spaceasking questions to other scientistscollecting information about planetslooking at the night sky with a telescope
Which of these lists has only products that come from plants?Paper, spices, and fibersWool, lumber, and butterMedicines, leather, and milkCotton, rubber, and eggs
Why is some food dehydrated for astronauts to eat in space?to make the food less messy to eatto preserve the food for extended flightsto increase the food's nutritional contentto keep the food from floating off the plate
Perfume sprayed from a bottle spreads more easily in a warm room of 25°C than in a cool room of 15°C. Which of the following correctly compares perfume molecules at 25°C to those at 15°C?At 25°C, they have more mass.At 25°C, they are moving faster.At 25°C, they have less kinetic energy.At 25°C, they are decreasing in volume.
Which of the following is believed to be one cause of global warming?atmospheric rise of carbon dioxidehot air from air conditioner exhaustmethane gas escaping from landfillsbody heat generated by overpopulation
What product was being formed as plants died and sank to the bottom of swamps?oilgascoalshale
What is the approximate length of time it takes the Moon to complete one lunar cycle?14 days29 days180 days365 days
A line graph is best used when the measured variable ischanging at a constant rate.nearly equal in several trials.being compared to a control.observed at one point in time.
All living things need energy to survive. What is the primary source of energy for all living things?plantsthe sunwaterthe wind
If a chemical reaction such as photosynthesis begins with 6 atoms of carbon [C], how many atoms of carbon [C] should be in the products?12 atoms of carbon [C]6 atoms of carbon [C]3 atoms of carbon [C]2 atoms of carbon [C]
Which object refracts light?mirrorsilver spoonfoilglass prism
A gastroenterologist is a doctor who treats problems of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. Which organ system is cared for by this type of doctor?circulatory systemmuscular systemdigestive systemnervous system
Which event becomes more likely during a drought in a prairie ecosystem?firetornadolandslideearthquake
When scientists publish papers describing the results and conclusions of their experiments, members of the scientific community shouldcollect their own data and rewrite the paper.evaluate the evidence in the paper.accept the paper as fact.ask the writer to write an alternate paper.
Kim lost her hammer outside. When she found it a few months later, some parts of the metal were covered with flaky, brown rust. Which type of change occurred when rust formed on the hammer?chemicalelectricalthermalphysical
Which human activity has most negatively affected air quality?burning coalgrowing cropsusing solar energy cellsconstructing nuclear power plants
Most of the bacteria in a forest ecosystem are best classified as which of the following types of organisms?consumersdecomposerspredatorsproducers
A pencil falls off of a desk. What moves the pencil toward the floor?massfrictiongravityspeed
All of the processes listed below cause changes in Earth's surface. Which of the following is the slowest to change Earth's surface?earthquake activitylandslidevolcanic eruptionweathering
A group of students was preparing an activity to determine whether certain materials will float or sink when placed on water. Before the experiment started, one student said, "I think the sponge will float." This statement wasa conclusiona factan observationa prediction
What tool is used to determine the mass of an object?BalanceMeter stickThermometerGraduated cylinder
According to the Periodic Table of the Elements, mercury (Hg) is different from other metals because mercury issolid at room temperature.liquid at room temperature.lighter than all other metals.heavier than all other metals.
When using more than the recommended amounts of pesticide on farmland, yards, and gardens, what is most likely to occur?Higher levels of pesticide may be less effective.The pesticides may break down quickly.Water supplies can be contaminated by pesticide runoff.The pesticide will increase the plant production.
According to the fossil record, when did episodes of rapid speciation commonly take place?while Earth's continents were joinedwhile Earth's habitats were stablebefore major climatic changesfollowing mass extinctions
A deer inherits some of its features from its parents. Other features come from its environment. Which feature would a deer most likely inherit from its parents?a long scarbrown eyesmissing teetha broken antler
What is the smallest structural and functional unit of the nervous system?brainorganneuronspinal cord
Male peacocks have large brightly colored tail feathers. What is the most likely reason for this?to attract potential matesto distract potential predatorsto help catch foodto preserve warmth
In a city, the daily high and low 16 temperatures for a month are best represented by which of the following?flow chartline graphpictographpie chart
Drew was measuring the growth of a vine that can grow almost 31 cm a day. Which would be the best way to record his data of the growth over a period of a day?a bar grapha line grapha pie grapha picture graph
All of the following are functions of a cell membrane exceptsurrounding and protecting the contents of the cell.releasing waste products from the cell.producing energy for cell processes.allowing gases to enter the cell.
Which characteristic will a baby chimpanzee inherit from its parents?fur colorhunting skillsfeeding behaviorsleeping routine
Which object is the best conductor of electricity?a wax crayona plastic spoona rubber eraseran iron nail
Why are some rocks smoother and rounder than others?They have the shapes of the minerals from which they are made.They were smoothed by the action of wind and water.They were squeezed up through the soil.They hardened in rounded pockets of soil.
A vaccine can prevent a serious disease. When a new vaccine is developed, it is given to a small group of people. Why would it be important to test each vaccine on a small group of people before everyone can have one?to figure out how much the vaccine is worthto determine how the vaccine will affect peopleto understand how that disease affects the human bodyto find out how many people are affected by the disease
When can producers make the most food?summer, because there is more sunlightsummer, because there is more heatspring, because there is more rainspring, because there are more leaves
Plants have special tissues that transport food, water, and minerals throughout the plant. What are these tissues similar to in animals?stomach and intestinesspinal cord and brainarteries and veinskidneys and liver
Which of the following statements best explains how the decomposition of plant and animal matter helps to form rich soils?Decomposition adds silt to soil.Decomposition adds water to soil.Decomposition adds oxygen to soil.Decomposition adds nutrients to soil.
Beans and coal both have stored energy. Where did the energy come from that is stored in beans and coal?From the Earth's gravityFrom the Sun's lightFrom the heat in the Earth's coreFrom the air's carbon dioxide
A metal ball has a constant velocity of zero. Which other quantity must also be zero?weight of the ballenergy of the ballacceleration of the ballinertia of the ball
What geographic obstacle causes water to condense in an air mass as the air mass moves?forestsoceansprairiesmountains
If an object is attracted to a magnet, the object is most likely made ofwoodplasticcardboardmetal
Which explains the pattern of day and night?Earth orbits the sun.Earth spins on its axis.The sun only transmits light energy during the daytime.The sun only transmits light energy above the equator.
Which is the best plan to make the fossil fuel supply last longer?mine more coalreduce car pollutionproduce more gasolinereduce electricity use
The stages of evolution of a star are determined by the mass of the star at the beginning of its life cycle. Which stage of evolution is the oldest form of a massive star?red giantsupernovaneutron starwhite dwarf
Which of these best indicates that sediments can be changed into rock?layers of sandstoneigneous intrusionslava bedsmountains with gneiss
Carbon cycles through several Earth subsystems. Which sequence most directly leads to the cycling of carbon that can result in the formation of petroleum?biosphere to lithosphereatmosphere to lithospherehydrosphere to atmospherebiosphere to atmosphere
Which word best describes the speed of a cart that has a positive velocity and a negative acceleration?slowfastdecreasingincreasing
A hurricane is a heat engine which converts one kind of energy into another. Hurricanes convert most of the heat energy intochemical energy.electrical energy.mechanical energy.potential energy.
Which of the following is a crucial piece of evidence supporting scientists' theory of how the continents and the ocean basins formed?Gravitational forces result in the fusion of small atoms.A differentiated iron core expresses magnetic properties.Currents redistribute heat in an unevenly heated liquid.A stream of charged ions disperses lightweight gases.
What motion causes day and night?revolution of Earthrevolution of the Moonrotation of Earthrotation of the Moon
The axis of Earth is tilted at an angle of 23.5° from the vertical position. Which of the following is the main result of this tilt?tideseclipseslength of yearchange of seasons
In an earthquake, the primary waves move throughairwatersoilrock
Which of the following is the major cause of tides?heating of the oceans by the Sungravitational pull of the Moonearthquakes on the ocean floorchanges in wind direction
A dog opens its mouth and lets its tongue hang out. A human's body produces sweat. These are two ways that organisms may adjust tocold temperatureshot temperaturesa shortage of fooda shortage of drinking water
Fires in forests from lightning rid the forest of dead branches and leaves. If the trees survive and the soil remains intact, the forest will experience regrowth to its climax state by which process?tropismsuccessiongradualismeutrophication
A class planted trees and shrubs in an empty dirt lot beside the school. The roots of the plants can help protect the soil. The soil is most likely being protected from what?a droughtwind erosionan earthquakewater pollution
In the process of photosynthesis, sunlight is converted intochemical energy.nuclear energy.mechanical energy.kinetic energy.
Vascular plants have tissue called xylem. Which of these is transported by the xylem?food made by the plantwater needed by the plantpollen for plant reproductioncarbon dioxide for photosynthesis
If Lisa wants to experiment with bean plants, which of these is the best example of a hypothesis?Bean plants come in many types.Fertilizer is good for bean plants.All bean plants are related to each other.Fertilizer will make bean plants grow taller.
A jeweler melts gold to make jewelry. As the gold melts, the massincreases.decreases.is destroyed.stays the same.
Which of the following tools is most useful for tightening a small mechanical fastener?chiselplierssandersaw
Oil, coal, and natural gas are fossil fuels formed under what conditions?low temperature and high pressurehigh temperature and high pressurelow temperature and low pressurehigh temperature and low pressure
Some birds build nests in the spring. This nest building is a seasonal adaptation that occurs to help the birdsfly southfind foodprotect their youngsurvive the winter
Which tool is used to measure the volume of a liquid?balancerulerthermometergraduated cylinder
The functions of a plant's roots are to support the plant andmake foodproduce fruittake in water and nutrientsaid in germination
All of the inherited traits that are passed to offspring during asexual reproduction come from a singleegg.sperm.virus.parent.
What energy transformation occurs when an electric lamp is turned on?electrical energy to light and heat energylight energy to electrical and mechanical energyheat energy to electrical and light energyelectrical energy to mechanical and heat energy
Which phase change in the atmosphere forms clouds?evaporationfreezingcondensationmelting
Where are the most reactive nonmetals located on the periodic table?the uppermost complete row of the tablethe rows at the bottom of the table connecting two sectionsthe column at the far left side of the tablethe second column from the right side of the table
Who was a leading authority on continental drift in the early 1900s?Alfred WegenerAlbert EinsteinCharles RichterCharles Darwin
In addition to oxygen, which gases make up the largest percentage of Earth's atmosphere?hydrogen, helium, and water vaporhydrogen, methane, and ozonecarbon dioxide, water vapor, and nitrogencarbon dioxide, methane, and helium
For many years, people have been curious about the stars. In the past, people have shared what they knew about the stars through stories and drawings. Which pair of tools would be most helpful for people today to gather and share information about stars?a notebook and a calculatora telescope and a computera calculator and a microscopea microscope and a telescope
During a presentation on astronomy, Professor Williams discussed various measurements in space. Which objects was she referring to when she talked about how astronomical units (AU) were determined?the Sun and Earththe Moon and Earththe inner and outer planetsthe Sun and the closest star
As more people have moved to the beach, the sea turtle population has decreased. Which is most likely the cause of this decrease?tropical stormsincrease in predatorshabitat losswarmer temperatures
The skin of a chameleon can change colors to help it blend with its surroundings. How would this adaptation most likely help a chameleon survive?by scaring predators away from the chameleonby attracting prey animals to the chameleonby sending a signal to other chameleonsby helping the chameleon hide from its predators
A student examines a new watch design. The watch has a small solar cell on its face. The main function of the solar cell is toreduce the cost of the watch.provide an energy source for the watch.make the watch more attractive.stop the watch from speeding up.
The presence of which of the following geological features provides the best evidence that glaciers once covered an area?wide riverbedsU-shaped valleysunderground cavesgroundwater springs
Which of these is a way the people of Virginia can help restore a natural ecosystem?Burn their trashPlant native plantsFeed leftover meals to deerDrain automobile oil into the grass
A student wants to figure out how many calories are needed to perform various activities. A list of some everyday activities is made, and the number of calories burned during each activity is recorded. Which method is the best way for the student to display and evaluate the information?write a paragraphmake a line graphdevelop a formulacreate a table
Sedimentary deposits formed from organic material tend to include a high amount ofiron.nickel.carbon.silicon.
According to the Big Bang Theory, which element most likely formed first?carbon dioxidehydrogenoxygennitrogen
Tim and Carla play catch with a ball. Which term describes the motion of a ball?shapesizespeedweight
Which set of equipment would be best to use when investigating what is found in a sample of pond water?net, gloves, specimen bagsbeaker, calculator, graph papermicroscope, eye dropper, slidesmeasuring tape, thermometer, clipboard
The Theory of Plate Tectonics revolutionized scientific thought because itexplained the movement of oceanic and continental crusts.demonstrated how tidal forces affect coastlines.mapped the pattern and frequency of earthquakes.explained the mineral differences between continents.
How does repeating an experiment improve the likelihood of obtaining accurate results?Data can be compared.Time can be decreased.Equipment can be added.Procedures can be changed.
One hundred grams of water and 100 grams of vegetable oil are heated in identical containers at 70°C for 5 minutes. Their temperatures at the end of 5 minutes are different due to the difference in which property?volumespecific heatconductivitychemical energy
There are MORE hours of sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere during which season?springsummerfallwinter
Which force produces energy as heat?pullgravityfrictionmagnetic
Biologists have discovered that the beluga whales of Canada's St. Lawrence River have the highest rates of cancer among animals. What is most likely the reason for this high incidence of cancer in these whales?chemical and pollutant runoff into the oceanaverage temperatures increased in the regiondepletion of natural prey from the ecosystemincreased levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
Reading from left to right, elements in the same period on the Periodic Table of the Elementshave the same reactivity.decrease in atomic mass.increase in atomic number.have the same number of electrons.
A device that converts light energy into electricity used in many handheld calculators is abattery.photocell.photo generator.photovoltaic cell.
Which most accurately describes a circle (pie) graph?used to demonstrate change in temperature onlyused to demonstrate change that is continuousused to demonstrate change that is not continuousused to describe how part of the data relates to all of the data
Which organisms benefit in the relationship between bees and flowering plants?only the beesonly the flowering plantsboth the bees and the flowering plantsneither the bees nor the flowering plants
The orbit of Earth is almost circular and has a period of about 365 days. Compared to the orbit of Earth, which of these objects usually have highly elliptical orbits and can have periods of over 1000 years?asteroidsmeteoritescometsmoons
How is the theory of plate tectonics different from a hypothesis regarding a certain aspect of plate movement?The theory addresses an Earth-science topic.The theory may change if new evidence emerges.The theory explains a number of related observations.The theory can be evaluated by a single-variable experiment.
A large quantity of heavy rain falling in a short time period will most likelyreduce the amount of nutrients in the soil.increase the number of minerals in the soil.reduce oxygen levels in the soil.increase the temperature of the soil.
An artificial pacemaker is a device that regulates the beat of the heart by an electrical stimulus. Some early pacemakers were powered by batteries and were worn externally with wires passing through the skin to the surface of the heart. Modern pacemakers are now much smaller and are implanted surgically. Which most likely has increased the lifespan and effectiveness of artificial pacemakers?the development of thinner wiresthe invention of lithium batteriesmass production of pacemaker partsreducing the cost of producing pacemakers
A balloon filled with helium gas is set free and starts to move upward. Which of the following best explains why the helium balloon moves upward?The density of helium is less than the density of air.The air resistance lifts the balloon up.There is no gravity acting on the helium balloons.The wind blows the balloon upward.
Oscar and Andre used a microscope to observe a sample of pond water and drew an example of each type of organism they saw. Then they compared their drawings. They discovered that their drawings of a euglena and a paramecium were alike, but their amoeba drawings had very different shapes. What are two things that Oscar's amoeba could have been doing that made his drawing look different from Andre's?eating and movingmoving and digestingdigesting and excretingexcreting and eating
The reading on a barometer rises when the airpressure increases.pressure decreases.speed increases.speed decreases.
Which of the following processes is responsible for changing liquid water into water vapor?photosynthesiscondensationevaporationprecipitation
In an atom, protons plus neutrons make up the atom'selectric charge.atomic mass.atomic number.electron number.
A generator converts mechanical energy to electrical energy by using a conducting metal loop turning in amagnetic field.gravitational field.steel sphere.copper sphere.
Deer live in forest for shelter. If the forest was cut down, which situation would most likely happen?The deer would find shelter in a different habitat.The deer would wait for the forest to grow back.The deer would move to another forest area.The deer would change the type of foods they eat.
Which physical property is important to have in a material used in cookware?poor conductor of heatgood conductor of heatlow flexibilityhigh flexibility
Which sentence describes a characteristic of offspring produced by sexual reproduction?The offspring have half the amount of genetic material as the parents.The offspring contain genetic material from both parents.The female offspring contain only genes from the mother.The male offspring contain only genes from the father.
What is involved in creating genetically modified bacteria?allowing them to reproduce freelychanging their food sourceusing biotechnology techniquesgrowing them on selected plants
Which of the following structures does a frog develop as it changes from a tadpole to an adult frog?eyesheartlungstail
One cause of heat in a car engine is caused by friction between parts. Which of these reduces the amount of heat produced by friction?fanoilgasolinebattery
The primary functions of the digestive system are to break down food, absorb nutrients and excrete wastes. Once food is absorbed, what system is responsible for carrying the nutrients to the body cells?respiratory systemcirculatory systemnervous systemskeletal system
If you breathe on a mirror, part of the mirror clouds up. What are you actually seeing when you see the mirror cloud up?Water droplets that formed from cooled water vapor in your breathCarbon dioxide that you are breathing out from your lungsOxygen that you are breathing out from your lungsCooled nitrogen in the air around you
The surface of the Moon is made up ofcraters, highlands, and flat areasswirling gaseslarge bodies of watera mixture of gases and water
Which sequence correctly shows the levels of increasing organization in the human body?tissues -> cells -> organ systems -> organscells -> tissues -> organs -> organ systemsorgans -> organ systems -> cells -> tissuesorgan systems -> organs -> tissues -> cells
Which layer of the atmosphere contains the greatest amount of water vapor?thermospheremesospherestratospheretroposphere
What should a scientist do to help make sure the results of an experiment are unbiased?Keep the results a secret.Do the math without a calculator.Change all of the variables in the experiment.Ask other scientists to attempt to reproduce the results.
Which property of water allows it to dissolve many different substances?It is a polar molecule.It contains hydrogen atoms.It has a high melting point.It has a low density.
Nevada is much drier than regions in California that are at the same latitude. Compared to these regions in California, which feature of Nevada contributes most to this dry climate?mountain ranges to the westhigh mean elevationfrequent earthquakessoil with a high sand content
A chemist observed bubbling and fizzing after adding an acid solution to a white powdery substance in a beaker. Which of the following can be inferred?The acid boiled when poured into the beaker.The acid and powder formed a new product.A physical reaction produced a gas mixture.A reaction occurred that produced heat.
Which of the following is visible through a reflecting telescope?planets around other starsblack holes in deep spacemoons around Jupitersurface of Saturn
A student is using hydrochloric acid in an investigation. Which piece of safety equipment is most important during this investigation?maskgogglesfire extinguisherdisinfectant spray
Generally, the deeper rock layers of Earth are older than shallower rock layers. How can the collision of two tectonic plates change the order of the rock layers?The rock layers contain pollutants that dissolve soil.The rock layers lack water due to extended droughts.The rock layers are compressed forming faults and folds.The rock layers are moved closer to rivers which erode landforms.
Which instrument should a student use to best examine bacteria?telescopehand lensmicroscopecomputer probes
Matter that is vibrating is producing ___.gaslightsoundshadows
Falling and rising air and water molecules inside of clouds are believed to be factors in the formation of lightning. Which kind of energy transfer is taking place to cause this weather phenomenon?electrical to thermalthermal to mechanicalchemical to mechanicalmechanical to electrical
Sleet, rain, snow, and hail are forms oferosionevaporationgroundwaterprecipitation
A windstorm knocks down many trees in a national park. Timber companies want to get rid of the fallen trees. How would this most likely harm the park ecosystem?reduces the risk of firedecreases erosion problemsincreases the risk of droughtremoves available nutrients
A plant has yellow flowers. What best explains why the flowers are yellow?The sunshine colored the flowers yellow.The flowers of the parent plants were yellow.It was very warm when they flowered.It rained every day.
Which tool is used to determine the mass of an object?rulerbeakerbalancethermometer
Prairie dogs can run very quickly. This adaptation enables the prairie dog toattract mates.intimidate predators.escape from predators.chase after their young.
A student has a liquid that does not mix with water. To predict whether the liquid will float on water or sink beneath it, which tools should be used to examine the liquid?ruler and compassmicroscope and voltmetergraduated cylinder and balancethermometer and Bunsen burner
Samuel investigated the effect of temperature on the growth of snapdragons. He recorded the results from the investigation and found that snapdragons do not grow well in low temperatures. What is the purpose of this conclusion in the scientific process?It helps to organize the data.It helps to evaluate the hypothesis.It helps to prepare for an investigation.It helps to collect information from observations.
Which of the following best describes the purpose of cellular respiration?to provide energy for cell activitiesto produce sugar for storage in cellsto release oxygen for breathingto supply carbon dioxide for photosynthesis
In a meadow ecosystem, mice receive most of the energy they need to survive directly from which of the following sources?mineralsoxygenplantswater
Which environmental stimulus causes leaves on certain trees to change color in autumn?loss of nutrients in the forest soillower air humidity in the forestchanges to amount of lightcompetition for survival
How does the length of daylight in New York State change from summer to fall?It decreases.It increases.It remains the same.
What is the name of the product formed from the reaction shown below? 4Fe(III) + 3O_{2} -> 2Fe_{2}O_{3}iron (II) oxideiron (III) oxideoxygen ferritediferrous trioxide
What type of galaxy is the Milky Way?spiralellipticalirregularoval
One thing that all human cells have in common is that theycontrol the brain.make food.move blood.take in energy.
Which two systems of the body are interacting when a runner sprains his ankle?the nervous system and the digestive systemthe digestive system and the circulatory systemthe respiratory system and the nervous systemthe muscular system and the nervous system
Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system. It rotates on its axis once about every 10 hours. What time period on Earth would be 10 hours long if Earth rotated on its axis once every 10 hours?a daya weeka montha year
The elements sulfur (S) and oxygen (O2) combine to form a substance called sulfur dioxide (SO2). Sulfur dioxide is also formed when coal and oil are burned. Sulfur dioxide can best be described asa metalan atoma compounda nonreactive gas
Which is a major difference between the life cycles of different types of plants?the way they diethe energy they usethe way they reproducethe way they make food
Sunlight passes through the windows of a car and causes the car seats to get hot. Which type of energy flow is involved in heating the seats?conductionconvectioninsulationradiation
When a large oak tree is cut down in a forest, it leaves a gap in the forest canopy which allows smaller trees to quickly grow in the available sunlight. Which interaction is best represented among the smaller trees?parasitismmutualismcompetitioncommensalism
How long does it take for the Moon to rotate on its axis?one dayone yearone weekone month
What is one way that humans can maintain good health?sleep all dayexercise dailyeat snacks oftenstay up late
Which is an example of a group of cells with a common structure and function?stomachmuscle tissuemitochondriadigestive system
Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disease caused by an autosomal recessive gene. If each parent carries one sickle cell allele, what are the chances that their child will have sickle cell anemia?no chanceone in fourtwo in fourthree in four
Which statement describes animal embryos?display all the features of an adultrepresent the earliest stage of developmenthave the same number of cells as a fertilized egghave half the number of chromosomes as an adult
The average temperature of the surface of Earth has increased approximately 1°C in the past century. Which reason best explains this increase in temperature?higher levels of oxygen in the atmospherelower levels of ozone in the atmospherehigher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmospherelower levels of nitrogen in the atmosphere
As the population in an area grows, water usage increases. Eventually, water usage can outstrip the supply. Which measure to increase the amount of available water demonstrates the best stewardship of the resource?discovering new reservoirs of water in the aquiferreducing water usage through conservation measurescombining hydrogen with oxygen to make waterpiping in water from an aquifer elsewhere
Which action illustrates a chemical change?painting a wood chestsawing a wood plankburning wood chipscutting down a tree
Which tool could be used to help someone count the number of ladybugs on a leaf?hand lensmeter stickmicroscopegraduated cylinder
Which two activities use most of the water used in an average U.S. household?flushing toilets and washing clotheswashing clothes and using sink faucetsusing sink faucets and showeringshowering and flushing toilets
Which are the best tools to use for growing and studying bacterial cultures?beakersPetri dishesmicroscopesgraduated cylinders
Which effect would the growing of legume crops such as beans and soybeans have?increase the efficiency of photosynthesisgreater immunity of crops against diseasesfewer bacteria in soil and in living organismsmore usable nitrogen for other plants
Which relationship between Earth's outer core and inner core generates a large portion of Earth's magnetic field?their relative massestheir relative motionstheir relative diameterstheir relative circumferences
Which order of succession of natural communities would most likely occur in New York State?grasses -> trees -> bushestrees -> bushes -> grassesbushes -> grasses -> treesgrasses -> bushes -> trees
White light can be separated into all of its component colors bymixing the three primary colors of light.passing the light through a prism.passing the light through a colored filter.using a translucent material to filter the light.
An Italian scientist named Alessandro Volta invented the Voltaic pile in 1800. It was able to produce a steady electrical current. Based on this description, what is the modern equivalent of the Voltaic pile?a wirea batterya resistora light bulb
Which would cause the most soil to erode from a river bank in just a few days?animals climbing up the river bankacid rain falling onto the river bankheat from the sun drying the river bankwater from a flood flowing over the river bank
A student is measuring a liquid in a graduated cylinder. The student is not tall enough to read the measurement at eye level. Which of these is the best action for the student to take to read the measurement correctly?stand on a chairestimate the amountpour out some of the liquid until it is at eye levelmove the graduated cylinder to a lower table
When Isaac Newton theorized that gravity caused objects to fall to the ground, he had also discovered the force that causeschemicals to react.volcanoes to erupt.lightning to strike Earth.the planets to orbit the Sun.
A disorder is associated with certain flaws in the human respiratory system. Which is most likely a typical symptom of this disorder?poor visiondifficulty breathingreduced muscle massincreased saliva production
Which of these is the main contributor to the formation of hurricanes?high barometric pressurewarm ocean aircalm ocean surfacedense surface air
Which statement correctly describes why there are fewer than 24 hours of daylight in Alaska during each day in April?Earth’s rotation slows during the day.Earth’s rotation slows during the night.Earth’s rotation causes both day and night.Earth’s tilt on its axis causes both day and night.
What best describes objects orbiting in the Kuiper Belt?metallicrockyhoticy
Coal was made from the remains of which ancient ecosystem?rocky islandsfertile valleysgreen swampsfast-flowing rivers
Which of these describes a location where minerals are most likely to form?cooled magma from a volcanoeroded sediment from a riverbedweathered rock from a canyonsaturated soil from a floodplain
In 1971, the bones of an extinct flying dinosaur were discovered. This kind of discovery helps everyone learn more aboutimpact of humans on Earth.effect of gravity on animals.history of animal species on Earth.likelihood that dinosaurs will reappear.
Which could be a possible way to prevent wildlife species from becoming endangered?drinking less waterestablishing more habitatscutting down more forestsstopping underground coal mining
The chemical reaction of ethane and oxygen produces carbon dioxide and water. Which is the best form to identify reactants and products of the reaction?a tablea grapha diagraman equation
Rheumatoid arthritis is a disease that occurs when the body attacks its own tissues. Which body system becomes disordered first?immunenervousdigestivecirculatory
Variation in which property between water at different temperatures contributes most to the formation of horizontal ocean layers having distinct temperatures?densityviscosityturbidityacidity
Which event would most likely cause a rapid extinction of organisms?a large asteroid impactregional droughtnew glacier formationa decrease in the growth of weeds
When an octopus feels threatened, it can release black ink into the water. The ink MOST likely helps the octopusmove quickly through the water.breathe oxygen from the water.hide from predators.use food faster.
Which is a way the agricultural biotechnology industry could have a positive impact on the environment?by producing crops that are virus resistantby making robots to replace large farm machinesby reducing the need for countries to import foodby increasing the use of wind farms that produce electricity
The following statements are from an article in a fitness magazine. Which of these is an opinion?Exercise increases muscle mass.Regular exercise reduces resting heart rate.People should exercise because it makes them feel better.Those who exercise regularly can increase their life span.
Which pair of items will repel each other?a positively-charged wool sock and a neutral plastic baga neutral cotton sweater and a negatively-charged plastic pelleta negatively-charged balloon and a positively-charged piece of papera negatively-charged plastic strip and a negatively-charged piece of cloth
In your body, what two organs work together to make sure that oxygen gets to all the other organs of your body?Lungs and kidneysHeart and lungsBrain and kidneysHeart and liver
Each organ in the digestive system has a specific function. During digestion, food passes from the stomach into the small intestine. Which statement best describes what takes place in the small intestine?Nutrients are absorbed from the food.Wastes are prepared to pass out of the body.Food is churned with acid to break down proteins.Excess water is reabsorbed into the blood stream.
Which structure is found in producers in nearly all ecosystems?stemsleavesrhizomeschloroplasts
A strawberry farmer finds that, after a hard freeze, some of his strawberries are still alive. Which best explains why these strawberries were able to survive?They have larger leaves to protect the fruit than the other strawberries.They have different genetic variations that cause them to be more resistant to cold temperatures.They are able to reproduce more quickly than the other strawberries.The color of the strawberries is darker, and they maintain their temperature better than other strawberries.
Which event would most likely result in more food for organisms that are scavengers?Fish die and sink to the bottom of a pond.Trees take up and store water with roots.Beavers build a new dam and lodge.Plants get more sunshine and water.
When you are riding a bicycle at night, your bicycle's reflectors help people in cars see your bicycle. How do bicycle reflectors work?They are made of a special material that gives off its own light.They are hooked up to batteries that allow them to produce light.They bounce light back from other sources.They are covered with paint that glows in the dark.
From Earth, the Sun appears brighter than any other star because the Sun is thenewest star.largest star.hottest star.closest star.
Scientists found fish fossils in the desert. What do the fossils tell about this environment when the fish were alive?There was a forest with large trees.There were lakes with water plants.There were mountains with glaciers.There was a desert with large rocks.
Chinese and European societies can use different but effective technologies when addressing medical questions. What does this demonstrate?Varied approaches can yield successful technologies.Not all technologies behave according to scientific laws.The development of science and technology are independent.Technology results more from practice than from scientific knowledge.
The exotic plant Melaleuca, or Australian Pine, has increased the intensity of fires across the Everglades. The amount of fuel available for fires has increased due to the presence of the Melaleuca. The Melaleuca releases massive numbers of seeds in response to fire, drought, and herbicide damage. Which best describes the reason the Melaleuca has been able to survive?adaptationcompetitiondiversificationmutation
Water that is used to cool nuclear power plants can be released into water bodies, causing an area called a thermal plume. A thermal plume can be 12-18°C warmer than surrounding waters. Although some fish may be attracted to the warmer water, other organisms may not be able to survive. Government officials order a study to determine the effects of a thermal plume in a water body near a nuclear power plant in North Carolina. Which factor most related to temperature should the study focus on in order to determine whether the thermal plume is damaging the health of the water system?pHdissolved oxygennutrient concentrationturbidity
What is a galaxy?a moon that orbits a planeta planet that orbits the Suna very large system of stars that is held together by gravitya very large system of planets that is held together by the Sun
Which part of a strawberry plant absorbs most of the water needed by the plant?flowersfruitsleavesroots
In cherry tomatoes, red color (R) is dominant to yellow color (r). If two heterozygous plants are crossed, what percentage of the offspring will be yellow?0%25%50%100%
Which situation is an example of a feedback system in the body that maintains homeostasis?a mouse pushing a lever to release fooda dog going to a food bowl when a bell ringsstudents receiving star stickers for good behaviorthe brain signaling blood vessels to return to normal
Which human organ system produces sperm or egg cells?digestive systemnervous systemrespiratory systemreproductive system
In the human body the digestion of proteins takes place primarily in which two organs?Mouth and stomachStomach and small intestineLiver and gall bladderPancreas and large intestine
What is the source of the organic matter needed for most fertile soils?moving watereroded sanddecaying plantsweathered bedrock
A scientist finds the bones of a dinosaur. What could help the scientist determine the approximate age of the dinosaur bones?the birds living in the area of the bonesthe weather conditions in the area of the bonesthe kinds of trees living in the area of the bonesthe index fossils in the area of the bones
A pond is near river but not connected to it. What would most likely allow fish to move from the pond to the river?a firea droughta snowstorma flood
A characteristic that all living organisms have in common is theyneed similar food.have the same life span.live in the same climate.are made of cells.
When the cells in an organism divide and reproduce, the organism can grow. Which cell organelle contains the genetic material for reproduction?the nucleusthe ribosomethe mitochondrionthe endoplasmic reticulum
Measurements of carbon dioxide concentrations in the air taken over the past decade have shown aleveling off.slow increase.steady decline.dramatic increase.
All matter is made up of particles calledcellsmoleculesatomscompounds
Which of the following energy conversions takes place in a battery-operated flashlight?electrical -> mechanical -> lightchemical -> mechanical -> lightchemical -> electrical -> lightnuclear -> electrical -> light
Which of these is most likely harmful to an ecosystem?Building new homes in a wetlandTaking away airplanes from an airportPlanting trees in an orchardAdding floors to an office building
Which units are best to measure the amount of rain that fell during a thunderstorm?centimetersdegrees Celsiusgramsseconds
Noah visited a park that had many oak trees. Which best describes the role of an oak tree in its ecosystem?Oak trees can live for a long time.Oak trees have leaves that change colors.Oak trees have strong branches and trunks.Oak trees are a source of food and shelter for animals.
Which of these resources will most likely be depleted first?WindSolar energyFossil fuelsWater
When athletes begin to exercise, their heart rates and respiration rates increase. At what level of organization does the human body coordinate these functions?at the tissue levelat the organ levelat the system levelat the cellular level
A student heated a pan of soup on a stove. While stirring the soup with a metal spoon, the student noticed the spoon became very warm. What is the most likely reason the spoon became warm?The stirring action heated the spoon.Warm air in the room heated the spoon.Heat from the soup was transferred to the spoon.The student's hand transferred heat to the spoon.
Where does a landslide begin?a low hilla plaina mountaina basin
Students are learning about the natural resources in Maryland. One group of students researches information about renewable natural resources in the state. The other group researches information about nonrenewable natural resources in the state. The resources the students investigate include plants, animals, soil, minerals, water, coal, and oil. Aluminum is a nonrenewable natural resource. Which of these methods of aluminum disposal is best for the environment?burning itrecycling itburying it in landfillscrushing it before throwing it away
Which of the following keeps the planets in our solar system in orbit around the Sun?atmospheric pressuregravitational forceelectromagnetic energythermal energy
Which human organ system primarily exchanges gases between the body and the atmosphere?excretorynervousskeletalrespiratory
Moving water was the most important factor in forming which of these?the Grand CanyonSan Andreas Faultthe Rocky MountainsMount St. Helens Volcano
Which list contains only nonliving things?coins, snakes, birdswater, rocks, sunlightrubber ball, plants, housesoil, fish, air
Which type of energy conversion occurs in a flashlight?chemical to lightmechanical to lightelectrical to chemicalmechanical to chemical
Rocks that contain fragments of bones, shells, and plant remains are most likelycrystals.igneous.sedimentary.metamorphic.
Which reaction is endothermic?cold packcoal burningstriking a matchcharcoal grill fire
Which property of water can cause a rock to break apart?Water boiling at 100°C.Water losing energy slowly.Water expanding as it freezes.Water having a high surface tension.
With a microscope, you see that an object has a cell wall, a chloroplast, and a nucleus. What is being observed?a plant cellan animal cella male organisma female organism
Which instrument would be best to measure the volume of a liquid?a pan balancea stopwatcha thermometera graduated cylinder
Which part of an atom is involved in chemical reactions?nucleus and its particlesnegatively-charged particlesneutrally-charged particlespositively-charged particles
Which tool is best used to collect information about the weather?rulerstopwatchthermometercollecting net
Which of these characteristics best helps scientists classify organisms?sizecolorgenderstructure
Which resource is most likely found in large amounts in forest ecosystems?ironwoodplasticpetroleum
Which of the following best describes a role of mushrooms in ecosystems?capturing energy from sunlightconsuming living plant materialtaking energy from animal hostsbreaking down dead plant material
A gardener wants to increase the ability of garden soil to retain water. Which of these should the gardener add to the soil?coarse sandloose gravelnitrogen pelletsorganic material
In the life cycle of a fly, which stage comes after the larval stage?eggadultnymphpupa
In which example could a thermometer be used to show that heat energy is being transferred?A piano is played by striking the keys.A shovel is used to move dirt from one place to another.A ball is thrown into the air.A stove is used to boil water in a pan.
What is the most likely function of a turtle's hard shell?convert energyincrease speedprovide protectionallow for reproduction
What is the main source of energy that causes water to evaporate from the surface of Earth?lightningsungravitywind
Which terms can be used to describe the properties of both a wave and a particle of light?charge and volumefrequency and massspeed and frequencyfrequency and density
To use energy from the Sun to power household appliances, the solar energy must be converted toheat energy.light energy.nuclear energy.electrical energy.
The yellow-throated longclaw is a bird that lives on the dry savanna of Africa. It looks almost exactly like another bird, the western meadowlark of North America. Although the birds look very similar, they are not even in the same taxonomic family. Scientists think the birds look alike because the two species developed under similar environmental pressures, even though they developed thousands of miles apart. Which process does their development demonstrate?sexual selectiondisruptive selectiondivergent evolutionconvergent evolution
The reaction that releases energy for use by the cell occurs in which site?Golgi apparatusendoplasmic reticulumcytoplasmic membranemitochondrial membrane
Why do doctors suggest that people get a flu vaccine each year?Viruses replicate more rapidly over time.Viruses can mutate from year to year.Vaccines are absorbed by the body after a year.Vaccines get stronger over time.
Which of the following events involves a consumer and producer in a food chain?A cat eats a mouse.A deer eats a leaf.A hawk eats a mouse.A snake eats a rat.
The change from day to night on Earth can be explained bythe movement of the Sun.the rotation of Earth.the movement of the Moon.the tilt of Earth.
Which part of a bicycle BEST moves in a circle?SeatFrameFoot pedalKickstand
When animals use energy, what is always produced?sugarheatoxygenstarch
Which type of rock is formed when hot lava cools?coaligneouslimestonemetamorphic
Which environmental factor would most likely prevent an orange tree from surviving in the desert?the lack of moisturethe high levels of heatthe extra amount of windthe low levels of sunlight
After a rainstorm, a big pile of rocks blocks part of a mountain road. Which event most likely caused the rocks to move onto the road?a tsunamia blizzarda landslidea hurricane
What would be the result of adding one proton to an atom?one electron would be addedthe atomic number would changethe total mass of the atom would decreasethe electrical charge would become neutral
What would be the best source to find information about DNA testing?local newspaperTV news reportscientific journalsworld almanac
In what section of Earth do earthquakes happen?crustmantleinner coreouter core
A complete fossil has been found of a type of bird that cannot be identified. What can most likely be determined about the bird from the fossil?The bird lived for a very short time.The bird lived in a dry environment.The bird existed at one time but is now extinct.The bird was not well preserved during the process of fossilization.
When large areas of the rainforests are cleared and burned, climate can be affected. Which best explains how rainforest destruction can contribute to the greenhouse effect?by threatening native plants and animalsby increasing the rate of soil erosionby increasing the water levels in oceansby releasing carbon into the atmosphere
Which information is used in a station model?yearly average precipitationdaily average barometric pressurenumber of lightning strikeswind direction in a particular point and time
Which part of a plant is most responsible for using energy from the Sun to produce food for the plant?flowerleafrootstem
Which natural formation is the best example of the result of both constructive and destructive forces such as weathering, erosion, and deposition of sediment?The Mid-Atlantic RidgeThe Grand CanyonThe Mojave DesertThe Himalayan Mountains
Which characteristic helps a fox find food?sense of smellthick furlong tailpointed teeth
Tay-Sachs disease is a recessive genetic disorder. If only one gene is present, an individual is a carrier. What is the probability of two healthy Tay-Sachs carriers having a child that has the disease?0%25%50%75%
Two identical lamps contain the same amount of different types of oil. They are allowed to burn until all the oil has been burned. Which measurement will best provide the total difference in chemical energy between the two oils?final weight of lamporiginal volume of oiltime it took for lamps to use oilheight of flame produced by lamp
Which disease is a result of abnormal cell division?AIDScancerchicken poxcommon cold
During which season of the year would a rabbit's fur be thickest?fallspringsummerwinter
Which property of an element is determined by adding the number of protons and number of neutrons?atomic massatomic radiuselectrical chargeelectrical potential
Which of these cycles takes 24 hours?Earth rotating on its axisEarth revolving around the Sunthe Moon rotating on its axisthe Moon revolving around Earth
Lemon juice turns litmus paper red, is corrosive and tastes sour. Lemon juice is classified asan acid.a base.an element.More information is needed to classify lemon juice.
A child walks across a carpet and generates an electrical charge. The child will get a slight shock by touching ametal doorknob.plastic toy.rubber ball.wooden block.
Which animal eats only plants?CatDogLionRabbit
A newborn kangaroo has the ability to crawl into its mother's pouch to drink milk. This is an example ofmigration.an instinct.hibernation.a learned behavior.
Which characteristic is shared by Earth and the Moon?glaciersflowing wateran atmosphere that contains oxygenan orbit created by the force of gravity
The Piedmont and Coastal Plains regions in Maryland produce crops such as corn, soybeans, wheat, tobacco, tomatoes, and apples. Which environmental factor most likely influences which crops are grown in these regions?soil qualitywind speedsbird migrationwater temperature
Which organ system is responsible for the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment?circulatoryexcretoryimmunerespiratory
Which of these will always produce a magnetic field?a bar of steela bar of aluminuman electric currentan electric charge
The periodic table provides information about the atoms of different elements. Which is a characteristic of an atom determines what element it is?number of neutronsnumber of protonsstate of matteratomic mass
Joel made some measurements and recorded this data: Sample 1 - 45 mL Sample 2 - 15 mL Sample 3 - 30 mL Sample 4 - 20 mL Which of these tools would most likely have been used to obtain these measurements?test tubemeter stickspring scalegraduated cylinder
A teacher demonstrates a chemical reaction. A student observes that the test tube in which the reaction occurs becomes warm. What is the source of the thermal energy generated by the reaction?energy stored in the reactantsbreaking bonds of the reactantskinetic energy absorbed by the reactionpotential energy absorbed by the reaction
Deer provide food for wolves. How does this relationship also benefit the deer herd?by protecting deer from other predatorsby controlling the deer populationby decreasing diversity within the herdby protecting the deer from disease
In what way does society benefit from research on diseases?New illnesses will develop.Doctors will visit their patients at home.More families will move closer to hospitals.Many illnesses will be prevented or cured.
Which energy transformation takes place in a gasoline lawn mower?potential energy to electrical energyelectrical energy to potential energykinetic energy to chemical energychemical energy to mechanical energy
Which of the following can only be seen with a telescope?the moon-like phases of Venusthe phases of Earth's moona lunar eclipsea solar eclipse
The rocks that form most of the Sierra Nevada are granitic rocks. This means that the mountains were most likely formed bystrike-slip faults.transform boundaries.volcanic activity.land subsidence.
In 1872, the United States created a national park called Yellowstone. The park includes more than two million acres in the three states of Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. Which statement best explains why national parks have a positive effect on ecosystems?National parks limit people from seeing wildlife.National parks limit mining, logging, and hunting.National parks protect land for farmers and ranchers.National parks protect land for people to build houses.
According to the endosymbiotic theory, double-membrane mitochondria originated as a result of some larger eukaryotic cells with flexible membranes engulfing smaller prokaryotic cells. Which of these explains where the outer layer of the double membrane of the mitochondria originated?the plasma membrane of the eukaryotic hostthe nuclear membrane of the eukaryotic hostthe ribosomes of the engulfed prokaryotic cellthe lysosomes of the engulfed prokaryotic cell
Toni got a cut on her arm while playing in a softball game. A few weeks later, the cut was healed. Which process is most responsible for repairing the cut?signals transported by nerve cellsexchange of oxygen in the lungstransport of waste by bloodreproduction of skin cells
A pot of cold water was heated on a stove until the water boiled. Which of the following best explains why the water was able to boil?The hot stove absorbed cold from the pot.The cold water absorbed heat from the pot.The hot stove gave off heat to the surrounding air.The cold water gave off cold to the surrounding air.
A spring-fed stream forms a pond that contains watercress plants, minnows, and crayfish. The pond receives 5 hours of direct sunlight every day. Which of the following is an abiotic factor in this ecosystem?the pond waterthe watercress plantsthe minnowsthe crayfish
A modern theory of the origin of the universe proposes that the first atoms formed were primarily atoms of which element?ironcarbonheliumhydrogen
A star is a large astronomical body thatreflects light.condenses light.emits light.absorbs light.
What happens to water when it boils?It changes color.It becomes heavier.It changes into water vapor.It stops bubbling.
Ms. Bristol measured the mass of a closed beaker containing several ice cubes. The mass was 100 g. An hour later, after the ice cubes had melted, Ms. Bristol measured the mass of the beaker again. What was the mass of the beaker of water the second time?50 g75 g100 g125 g
A student has two solid samples of the same substance. Which property do the substances most likely have in common?densitymassshapevolume
In which object does chemical energy most likely transform into electrical energy?a candlea mirrora flashlighta television
What is the mass number of an atom with 17 protons, 17 electrons, and 18 neutrons?17343552
Some machines can remove the salt that is in seawater. How does removing salt from seawater most help people?provides useable drinking watercreates cleaner water for riversenables more fish to live in lake waterallows more plants to grow along rivers
Which body system is most affected by a disease that causes the bones to become weak and brittle?excretorymuscularskeletalnervous
Why can a small fire be put out by placing a heavy blanket over it?This lowers the temperature.This makes the flames smaller.This absorbs the burning substance.This keeps oxygen from reaching the fire.
There is a river at the base of Mount Tom. In the spring the water level is usually very high. In the summer it is lower. The higher level of water during the spring comes fromhurricanes.melting snow.tornadoes.evaporating water.
Earthquake waves are recorded by seismograph machines. What does an earthquake wave transmit?energylightparticlesspeed
The snowshoe hare was once common in Maryland. In 1986, researchers in the state noted that the snowshoe hare was no longer found in Maryland. Which statement best explains why the snowshoe hare is no longer found in Maryland?Water quality has improved.There are too many trees.The temperature is too cold.Housing developments have replaced fields.
In the initial stages of manned space exploration, scientists needed to address adequate nutrition to provide astronauts with energy throughout the mission. Which of these criteria could not be used when considering food and energy for astronauts during manned space flights?history of space foodfood crumbs in zero gravityrehydration of certain foodsfood storage for long periods
Which is the best example of evaporation?raindrops freezingan ice cube meltinga puddle drying in the suna sponge soaking up water
In a forest community, trees produce leaves that can be eaten by deer. The leaves also fall to the forest floor during autumn. Fungi break the leaves down into nutrients that enter the soil. What is the decomposer in this forest community?the soilthe deerthe treesthe fungi
Compared to Earth, the Moon isdrier.larger.heavier.brighter.
What process forms an image in a mirror?absorbing lightreflecting lightrefracting lighttransmitting light
Which is an example of a physical change?ice meltingnail rustingbread bakingwood burning
Which of the following describes an object that must have a net negative charge?It contains more molecules than atoms.It contains more electrons than protons.It is carrying an electric current.It is made of metal.
Rocks found on Earth are classified as sedimentary, metamorphic, or igneous based onwhere the rocks were found.how the rocks were formed.the composition of the rocks.the color and shape of the rocks.
Which of the following is formed when two elements combine chemically?an atoma compoundan electrona mixture
Which of the following is the most important safety practice when using a rock hammer on a geology field trip?wear gloves while breaking rockswear goggles while breaking rockshave a bucket of sand in case of sparkshave a clean eye-wash station available
To which organ system do the esophagus, liver, pancreas, small intestine, and colon belong?reproductive systemexcretory systemdigestive systemendocrine system
When sodium hydroxide reacts with a copper nitrate solution, the reaction vessel needs to be kept on ice to slow down the reaction. What best describes this reaction?an exothermic reaction that absorbs energyan exothermic reaction that releases energyan endothermic reaction that absorbs energyan endothermic reaction that releases energy
Scientists measured the patterns of spectral lines given off by distant galaxies and concluded that almost all of these galaxies are moving away from Earth. What did the scientists observe directly?a shift toward longer wavelengths of lighta shift toward shorter wavelengths of lightthe absence of wavelengths in the visible light rangethe compression of wavelengths in the visible light range
When a multicellular organism is damaged, it will repair itself asit mutates.the cells work together.the cells move.it makes its own food.
Genes are located on chromosomes which are composed ofDNA.RNA.ATP.ADP.
Which of the following best describes the number of chromosomes in a normal human liver cell?23 pairs of chromosomes46 different types of chromosomes46 male chromosomes and 46 female chromosomes23 original chromosomes and 23 duplicate chromosomes
A student measures the growth of a group of plants given different amounts of fertilizer. Which data display should the student use to compare the growth of the plants?bar graphscatterplotline graphpie chart
What is a large buildup of moving ice and snow called?drumlindeltaglaciermoraine
Which of these conditions would most likely be shown in the fossil record as a reason for mass extinctions?increased competition for resourcesfalling sea levels and global coolingorganisms with beneficial traitsincreased solar activity
One of the functions of a topographic map is togauge local rainfall amounts.study the area's geological history.predict the severity of earthquakes.show the surface features of an area.
Reptiles become more active as the day gets warmer. This is becausethey have scaly skin.they have slimy skin.their body temperature stays at a constant level.their body temperature changes with the environment.
Which scientific model could be used to predict the properties of an element?closed loop systemPunnett squarePeriodic Tablewater cycle chart
Some of the thermal structure of Earth is the result of a combination of chemical composition, temperature, and pressure. Which is a boundary that best demonstrates a contact point between layers having relatively the same temperature and chemical composition?lithosphere and mesosphereinner core and outer coreouter core and mantlemantle and crust
A hillside along a highway has exposed layers of undisturbed sedimentary rock. Which method would be best for scientists to use to determine the relative age of these sedimentary rock layers?apply the law of superpositioncalculate the rate of radiometric decayapply the law of crosscutting relationshipscalculate the rate of tectonic plate movement
What are petri dishes used for in a lab?reflecting light to form imagesmeasuring the mass of moleculesgrowing bacteria in a controlled settingobserving the strength of physical forces
How do most fish get the oxygen they need to survive?They take in water and break it down into hydrogen and oxygen.Using their gills, they take in oxygen that is dissolved in water.They get their oxygen from the food they eat.They come to the surface every few minutes to breathe air into their lungs.
Miranda's neighbors have an apple tree in their yard. What is the source of energy for the apple tree?rainsoilsunlightwind
Some types of trees are able to survive the heat of a forest fire. Which of the following characteristics would best help a tree survive a fire?large leavesshallow rootsthick barkthin trunks
Which of the following would most likely happen if grasses and shrubs were removed from a rural Massachusetts ecosystem?There would be an increase in consumers in the ecosystem.There would be an increase of photosynthesis in the ecosystem.There would be a decrease in food energy produced by the ecosystem.There would be a decrease of carbon dioxide available to the ecosystem.
In 2004, Maryland recycled more than 35% of all of the waste the state produced. Which of these benefits does recycling provide to Maryland?fewer wild animalsdecreased farm cropsless trash sent to landfillsdecreased use of electricity
A student finds a round, smooth pebble on a beach. Which action made the pebble smooth?rain fallingwind blowingsnow meltingwaves moving
The position of the liver in the circulatory system maximizes its ability to filter out harmful chemicals as soon as they enter the bloodstream. Blood travels to the liver from thenervous system.digestive system.immune system.excretory system.
A student recorded the amount of rain that fell in one year in his city. What is the best way for him to organize his information?diagramgraphjournalmap
While Anna was testing a circuit, she dropped a light bulb. What is the safest thing Anna can do?get a new bulb to finish the testpush the broken glass under a tabletell her teacher that she broke the bulbask her partner to help pick up the broken glass
Sugar is added to water and the mixture is stirred. Which observation is evidence that the sugar dissolved in the water?Less sugar is visible.The water is cloudy.The sugar turned into crystals.Bubbles formed in the water.
The direction water flows in a river depends onthe length of the riverthe slope of the landthe type of rock over which the water flowsthe location of the North Pole
A soccer player kicks a soccer ball across a field. Which factor has the most effect on the distance the soccer ball travels?the color of the ballthe force of the kickthe length of the fieldthe temperature of the air
Many cells have a nucleus that contains chromosomes. These chromosomes carry genes that are composed ofhormonesDNA moleculesminerals and waterundigested food molecules
Which items would best protect a group of students while investigating a forest ecosystem?short pants and T-shirtsshort pants and long-sleeved shirtslong pants and T-shirtslong pants and long-sleeved shirts
A student needs to find the mass of an atom. The numbers of which atomic particles determines the mass of the atom?only its protonsonly its electronsboth its protons and neutronsboth its neutrons and electrons
Which activity is necessary for humans to maintain good health?readingrestingdrivingtalking
A student completes several tasks while making breakfast. During which task does the student make a solution?adding sugar to teapouring milk on cerealspreading jelly on toastsprinkling cheese on eggs
Which natural event can dry out plants and cause wildfires?droughtearthquakefloodtornado
Where would nitrogen most easily be found in the nitrogen cycle?in animal wastein drinking water suppliesin underground mineral depositsin carbon dioxide released by factories into the atmosphere
Before it rains water must collect inclouds.snow.sleet.fog.
Which atmospheric phenomena are created by the interaction of charged particles with Earth's magnetosphere?aurorastornadoesrainbowsinversions
Which of these BEST describes the way a feather feels?ColorfulSoftLowBright
A tight metal lid on a jar of pickles may loosen when it has been held in hot water. This is because the hot water causes theglass jar to contractmetal lid to contractglass jar to expand more than the metal lid expandsmetal lid to expand more than the glass jar expands
A scientist reads about an experiment conducted by a researcher.The scientist conducts the same experiment and collects data but this data contradicts what was published by the researcher. What should the scientist do since the data from the two experiments is contradictory?Repeat the experiment to check the data collected.Contact the researcher who first performed the experiment.Contact the scientific journal that published the experiment.Disregard the data collected since the experiment was published.
The organisms that convert solar energy and raw materials into food areproducers.consumers.herbivores.decomposers.
Large amounts of metals like iron and aluminum are found indead treeswateranimal bonesoil wellsrocks
Which of these occurs if myosin fails to bind to actin during muscle contraction?The muscle cells will lose ATP.The muscle cells will remain relaxed.The muscle cells will produce lactic acid.The muscle cells will lose calcium ions.
How are cells able to produce the proteins required by certain conditions?by synthesizing new genesby altering existing genesby expressing existing genesby mutating new genes
An organism's cells include organelles and a cell wall. In which taxonomic group or groups might the organism be classified?plants onlybacteria or archaeaplants, fungi, or protistsbacteria, fungi, or protists
Which of these structures produces male gametes in humans?testesovariesscrotumfallopian tube
The length of a year is equivalent to the time it takes for onerotation of Earthrotation of the Sunrevolution of Earth around the Sunrevolution of the Sun around Earth
Which of these organisms has cells with cell walls?bluebirdA pine treeA ladybugA fox squirrel
Which is the result of mitosis?two identical nucleifour unique cellsa decrease in genesa new protein
Which of these materials on the walls of a room would work best to keep sound from making an echo?marblecarpetwoodglass
The starch and water molecules in potato cells are stored in what organelle?mitochondrionnucleusribosomevacuole
Which animals live part of their lives in water and part on land, and go through metamorphosis?reptilesamphibiansbirdsmammals
A student puts two identical plants in the same type and amount of soil. She gives them the same amount of water. She puts one of these plants near a sunny window and the other in a dark room. This experiment tests how the plants respond tolightairwatersoil
Humans need food to grow and survive. Food that is not used immediately by the body for energy isstored for future useconverted to water for energyused to remove wastes from cellstransformed into oxygen for survival
What structure surrounds the cell and regulates materials that enter and leave the cell?nucleuschloroplastmitochondrioncell membrane
In order for boulders to become sediments, the boulders must first beheated and melted.weathered and eroded.recrystallized.buried.
During which stage of an insect's life cycle does the female lay eggs?nymphlarvapupaadult
When a dog smells food and begins drooling, it is responding to an external stimulus. Which of these describes a response to an internal stimulus?A cat sees a mouse and crouches.A parrot hears a name and repeats it.A person eats spoiled food and vomits.A worm senses water and moves to the surface.
Which is an example of melting?Flowing water making a rock smoothA carrot becoming soft when cookedSugar mixed into tea making the tea sweetButter changing into liquid in a warm pan
Students perform an investigation designed to measure the daily growth of a bean plant. Which should the students do every day of this investigation?record dataform hypothesisform conclusiondefine variables
Ice cream in a bowl changed from solid to liquid in a few minutes. Which of the following most likely caused this change?Bacteria grew in the ice cream.Heat was added to the ice cream.Water evaporated from the ice cream.Frozen berries were sprinkled on the ice cream.
The change in the use of one model of the solar system to the use of another model resulted in major changes in science and society. Which two scientists produced the earlier and later models, respectively?Hooke and MendelNewton and GalileoAristotle and EinsteinPtolemy and Copernicus
An atom with a +1 charge haslost a proton.lost an electron.gained a proton.gained an electron.
Which is an example of a single-celled organism?amoebainsectfishworm
The Great Ocean Conveyer ocean current system runs north through the Atlantic from the equatorial region. If this current got disrupted, North American and European climates would becomerainier.colder.windier.more humid.
Which region of the Milky Way contains a population that consists mostly of old stars?the halothe spiral armsthe nuclear bulgethe open clusters
When a switch to a ceiling fan is turned on, electrical energy is being transformed intoatomic energy.potential energy.chemical energy.mechanical energy.
An agricultural scientist, George Washington Carver, is most famous for his research ontobacco.peanuts.mold.corn.
A student pours a clear liquid from a test tube into a beaker with a clear liquid already in it and notices that the mixture turns pink. The student infers the two clear liquids are different. This inference is a result ofclass discussion.previous knowledge.temperature changes.student observations.
In what leaf structure is photosynthetic tissue found?cuticleupper epidermismesophyllvascular bundle
The crude oil extracted today was formed millions of years ago from the fossilized remains of algae and other tiny marine organisms. Most parts of the organisms decomposed soon after they died. Which biomolecules decomposed more slowly and became the basis of crude oil?proteinscarbohydratesfatty acidsnucleic acids
Temperatures below freezing are expected overnight. What might be done to protect plants growing outside?trim the leavesweed themcover themgive them plant food
Prolonged exercise stimulates muscle cells to absorb sugar from the blood. This mechanism reduces stress placed on the body by signaling the body to produceinsulin.lipids.hemoglobin.hydrochloric acid.
Which geologic feature is evidence that the North American plate once collided with the Eurasian and African plates?the Appalachian Mountainsthe Mohave Desertthe Mississippi Riverthe Great Lakes
During an experiment, a student reports that a liquid turned green when mixed with another liquid. This is an example ofa measurementa predictionan explanationan observation
Which of the following causes a chemical change?sugar added to sodadetergent added to waterlemon juice added to milksalt added to water
Which human organ system exchanges gases with the environment?endocrinecirculatoryrespiratoryintegumentary
Improvements in geological observation technologies have made it easier for scientists to locate resources in Earth's crust. These technologies have allowed for an increase in availability of which resource?wind powersolar energyfossil fueltidal energy
An engineer constructs a prototype from wood. Which of the following is the best tool for the engineer to use to make the prototype's surface smooth?band sawchiseldrillsandpaper
If left in the sunshine, water in an open jar willevaporate.condense.freeze.melt.
In some locations, squirrels sleep for long periods of time during the winter months. Which of the following most likely causes these squirrels to sleep for long periods of time?increase in humiditydecrease in temperatureclouds forming in the skywinds blowing in the night
Which of the following helps the body to cool down?shiveringsweatingrunning a fevertaking deep breaths
The brown fur of the arctic hare turns white in winter. How does this color change most likely help the arctic hare?It helps the animal save water.It helps the animal hide from predators.It helps keep the animal cool.It helps protect the animal from disease.
A group of students found metamorphic rocks near a campsite. The presence of metamorphic rocks is most likely evidence ofdinosaur activitysediment depositionhigh pressurewind-borne sand
As water vapor condenses into liquid, which of the following can be formed?icesteamfrostclouds
Which of these particles, when found in soil, contributes most to the water retention in soil?gravelsandsiltclay
Which of the following forms of energy is released or absorbed in most chemical reactions?light energyelectrical energysound energyheat energy
Which of these must occur for sediments to form new rock?precipitationevaporationpartial meltingrecrystallization
A student wants to find the most accurate account of a scientific discovery that took place within the past three months. In which of these sources should the student look?newspapersmagazinesscience textbooksscience journals
What is taken in by the leaves of a tree so it can make its own food?oxygensugarsunlightwater
Radio signal interruption sometimes causes a humming or buzzing sound. These sounds are most likely caused bybalanced forces.longitudinal waves.gravitational forces.electromagnetic waves.
Students planned an investigation that included adding a quantity of vinegar to a small amount of baking soda. Which is the best tool to measure the volume of the liquid vinegar used in the investigation?pan balancespring scalemeter stickgraduated cylinder
Garrett collected some large rocks from a stream near his home. He measured the rocks on a balance. When he records the mass of the rocks, which units should Garrett use?poundskilogramsfluid ouncescubic centimeters
Which of the statements is the most accurate in describing the chemical equation shown below? 2H_{2}(g) + O_{2}(g) -> 2H_{2}O(g) + energyA solid is produced.Energy is released.Energy is absorbed.Equal numbers of molecules are on both sides of the arrow.
A female dog is having puppies. She has black fur, brown eyes, and a curly tail. She can sit, bark, and roll over on command. Which set of traits can the female dog's puppies inherit?brown eyes, black furfur, roll over on commandbrown eyes, sit on commandbark on command, curly tail
Scientists estimate that Maryland contains more than 850 million tons of coal. Coal is most commonly used to produce ___.electricitymedicinemetalswater
Large populations of tortoises inhabited the Galapagos Islands before humans. When humans settled on the islands and introduced goats, the number of tortoise declined. What is most likely the explanation for the decrease in the tortoise population?Goats consume tortoise hatchlings.Goats pollute water sources.Goats compete with tortoises for vegetation.Goats contribute to soil erosion.
Hereditary information is transmitted from parents to offspring throughcell division.genes.germination.metamorphosis.
Which device converts kinetic energy into electrical energy?calculatorgeneratorelectric motorelectromagnet
Which behavior is a learned behavior?eating with a forkshivering when it is coldsquinting your eyes in bright lightdeveloping a fever when you are sick
The distance between the Sun and the next closest star, Proxima Centauri, is most accurately measured inmagnitudes.light years.perigees.red shifts.
Which of these uses sound waves to locate underwater objects?radarsonartelescopemicroscope
Paleontologists are scientists who study evidence of past life on Earth. Which method do paleontologists most likely use to determine the forms of life that existed millions of years ago?examine current species of plants and animalsresearch past species in the libraryinterview older scientistsexamine fossils records
The temperature in a hot star is high enough to pull electrons away from atoms. What state of matter results from this process?gassolidliquidplasma
Which resource, abundant in Nevada, is nonrenewable?copperwindsunlightwood
A student reaches one hand into a bag filled with smooth objects. The student feels the objects but does not look into the bag. Which property of the objects can the student most likely identify?shapecolorability to reflect lightability to conduct electricity
An abiotic factor that most influences the organisms living in a salt marsh isfish.water.predators.grasses.
When oil is burning, the reaction willonly release energyonly absorb energyneither absorb nor release energysometimes release and sometimes absorb energy depending on the oil
Fourth graders are planning a roller-skate race. Which surface would be the best for this race?gravelsandblacktopgrass
Protein is used by the human body tobuild strong bones.absorb vitamins.repair cells.provide fiber.
Changes in the weather are important to people living in Alaska. Which two tools best help scientists to share information about weather?radio and computerclock and notebooktelevision and hand lensmicroscope and telephone
Which outcome is most likely if a person consumes more Calories than needed for daily activities?weight lossweight gaindeficiency diseaseinfectious disease
In a mixture, a magnet is used to separate some particles from sand. The dark particles are most likely made of which element?sodiumironsulfurcopper
A student tosses a ball into the air. Which force causes the ball to fall back to the ground?gravitymagnetismmechanicalfriction
The gravitational force between two objects depends on the distance between the objects and each object'smassvolumepressuretemperature
Scientists who have studied global climate changes have found that the average temperature of Earth has risen. There has also been an increase in the accumulation of atmospheric greenhouse gases. What is the goal of the scientific community in collecting this type of data?to understand how greenhouse gases are related to global warmingto decrease the temperature using fossil fuelsto change public attitude on using natural resourcesto increase the amount of ice in the Arctic
Paper chromatography is a process used to separate mixtures of substances into their components. The components are carried by a mobile phase through a stationary phase made of absorbent paper. An investigation analyzed a sample of black ink to determine its components.Which property allows the components to separate?the solubility of the components in the mobile phasethe evaporation rate of the components at a certain temperaturethe magnetic property of the componentsthe thickness of the paper used as the stationary phase
In one area, a large source of prey for eagles is rabbits. If the number of rabbits suddenly decreases, what effect will it most likely have on the eagles?Their numbers will increase.Their numbers will decrease.They will adapt new behaviors.They will migrate to new locations.
Moving water in a river is considered a renewable resource because itcarries dissolved oxygeneasily erodes sedimentsis made of natural gascan be recycled by nature over time
When studying planetary data, Jackie found some similarities and differences among the planets that make up the solar system. Which generalization is true about the orbits of the major planets in the solar system?Planetary orbits have the same plane.Planetary orbits are mostly elliptical in shape.Planets orbit at the same speed around the Sun.Planets orbit in different directions around the Sun.
When nitrogen-rich runoff from farms enters a nearby farm, it causes abundant growth of algal mat on the pond surface. As a result, underwater plants in the pond begin to die. Identify the limiting factor that is most responsible for causing the underwater plants to die.oxygensunlightnitrogencarbon dioxide
What is the main source of energy for the water cycle?the Sunfossil fuelscloudsthe ocean
Which of the following properties of a substance is conserved during thermal expansion?massvolumeshapedistance between particles
Trees use narrow tubes to transport water upward. Which property of water allows the water to rise in these narrow tubes?high vapor pressurehigh boiling pointcohesion of moleculesnet charge of molecules
Which pair together could cause a rainbow?Fog and cloudsRain and snowClouds and iceSunshine and rain
The property of matter that resists changes in motion is calledinertia.friction.gravity.weight.
Monarch butterflies use milkweed plants during all of their life stages. Milkweed plants grow in open areas, such as grasslands and wetlands. They also often grow between row crops. Given this information, which of these biotechnologies would pose the greatest threat to monarch butterflies?development of new antibioticsdevelopment of new herbicidesdevelopment of disease-resistant cropsdevelopment of insect-resistant crops
In the past, Native American Indians buried dead fish along with corn seeds. This technique was used because the decomposing dead fish wouldprovide nutrients for the growing corn planteliminate the need for weeding around the corn plantrelease oxygen for use by the corn plantsupply all the water needed by the corn plant
Earth is composed of layers of material with different properties. Which of the following is most likely to be in constant motion?coremantleoceanic crustcontinental crust
Which mechanism helps carbon to cycle from the atmosphere to living organisms?tissue decompositioncellular respirationphotosynthesistranspiration
A city has an outbreak of a disease that affects an unusually large portion of its population at the same time. Which term best describes the outbreak?pandemicplagueepidemicinfection
In which structure is the Sun located?Milky Way GalaxyAndromeda GalaxyCat's Eye NebulaHorseshoe Nebula
Removing waste from the body is the primary function of which body system?excretorynervouscirculatoryskeletal
Which discovery revealed that the universe contains many structures composed of millions of stars?novasgalaxiesblack holessolar systems
If a tall tree falls over in a crowded forest, which resource becomes available to the surrounding plants?airsoilwatersunlight
What best describes the mantle of Earth?a thin layer that is located on the surfacea solid layer made of iron and nickelthe largest layer between the crust and outer corethe smallest layer that is made up of molten rock
When Javier exercises, his muscle cells need more oxygen. Which would help Javier's muscle cells receive more oxygen?decreasing his respiration rateincreasing his perspiration rateincreasing the rate his heart beatsdecreasing the rate his blood flow
Which process has most likely occurred when new traits appear in a species?selective breedinggenetic mutationcrossbreedingcloning
A patient visits the doctor for a checkup and is diagnosed with skin cancer. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this disease?poor eating and sleeping habitsexposure to ultraviolet raysa defect in the person's immune systemworking with plants and animals
Which of the following forms of energy can travel by vibrating particles of air?electricallightmagneticsound
A chef uses a metal spoon to stir noodles cooking in a pan. After five minutes, she notices that the thermal energy from the pan has made the spooncold.hot.wet.dry.
Which will most likely cause a decrease in predator populations?an increase in prey populationsa decrease in prey populationsa decrease in decomposersan increase in producers
A robin catches and eats a cricket. Which statement best describes the roles of each animal?The robin is the prey and the cricket is the predator.The robin is the predator and the cricket is the prey.The robin is the consumer and the cricket is the producer.The robin is the producer and the cricket is the consumer.
Hookworms live inside the intestines of dogs. As the dog eats, the hookworms consume partially digested food. As a result of this nutrient diversion, the dog can become malnourished and weakened. Which best describes the relationship between the hookworms and the dog?a parasitic relationshipa mutualistic relationshipa predator-prey relationshipa producer-consumer relationship
The prairie grass ecosystem once had a deep layer of topsoil which was protected by the grasses that covered it. Removal of these grasses for farmland is causing the soil to be eroded mainly bywind and rain.animal movement.crops grown in the soil.increased temperatures.
When the Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun, what season is occurring in Australia?fallwinterspringsummer
Light waves are arranged in the electromagnetic spectrum bywavelength and brightness.speed and color.brightness and color.wavelength and frequency.
In order to distinguish fact from opinion, conclusions in experiments should berecorded on a computer.presented in bar graphs.based on verifiable data.organized in a table.
Pumice is formed when lava from a volcano cools. Which rock type is pumice?Gaseous rockIgneous rockSedimentary rockMetamorphic rock
The principle of uniformitarianism states that most of the landscape of Earth was formed slowly and over a long period of time. Which occurrence of Earth is least supported by this principle?soil developmentvolcanic eruptionplate movementfossil formation
Selective breeding has resulted in plants that are resistant to pests and produce a higher yield of fruits and vegetables. Which of these is the most likely disadvantage that can result from this process?decreased genetic diversityhabitat destructionoverpopulationincreased erosion
A student measured the volume of water in a pan. The student boiled the water for thirty minutes and then measured the volume of the water again. The volume of water most likelydecreasedincreasedremained the same
Lori owns a house next to the lake. She uses lots of fertilizer to keep her lawn green. Which impact could fertilizing her lawn have on the lake?an increase in the algae populationan increase in the fish populationan increase in the mosquito populationan increase in the lake's depth
To compare the hardness of different minerals, it would be BEST to findthe color of the minerals.which minerals scratch other minerals.which minerals reflect light most strongly.the samples that feel smoothest to the touch.
A house is built in a desert, where there is no electricity and very little wind. Which action could lead to operating the electrical appliances in the house that would cause the least amount of environmental pollution?constructing a small hydroelectric plantplacing solar panels on the roof of the houseusing gasoline generatorsburning coal or wood
Students are learning about the natural resources in Maryland. One group of students researches information about renewable natural resources in the state. The other group researches information about nonrenewable natural resources in the state. The resources the students investigate include plants, animals, soil, minerals, water, coal, and oil. Which nonrenewable natural resource heats homes?sunlightaluminumnatural gasocean waves
Gregor Mendel was the first to show that organisms had traits that are passed on from parents to the next generation. In order for the scientific community to accept Mendel's discovery, others had toinvent the microscope.read through his journals.duplicate the results of his experiments.invest money in his scientific investigations.
Alicia has lots of old bicycle parts. She wants to build something new with the parts. What is the first thing Alicia should do?plan the new itemconstruct the new itemtry out the new itemevaluate the new item
Which is a major organ of the nervous system?brainstomachlungbone
Some students were investigating the relationship between position, time, and speed. The students marked the initial position of a toy car. The students set the car into motion and marked the position of the car each second. Which of these are most appropriate for recording and analyzing the students' data?a table and a bar grapha table and a line grapha pie chart and a bar grapha pie chart and a line graph
If the number of trees significantly decreases, the atmosphere's level of which gas might significantly increase?nitrogencarbon dioxidecarbon monoxidehydrogen
Which of the following is the best estimate of the number of stars in a typical galaxy?tenshundredsthousandsbillions
A company plants trees on a bare hillside. Which of these is the BEST reason for planting the trees?The trees provide oxygen for the soil.The trees prevent soil from washing away.The trees make shade for animals living there.The trees cause animals to move to other places.
Index fossils help scientists estimate the age of a rock because index fossil species only existed for a relatively short time. What happened to the species that are now used as index fossils?They became extinct.They changed their diets.They hid in marine sediments.They migrated to new environments.
Feathers, wings, and the hollow bones of birds are examples ofadaptations for flightresponses to stimuliunnecessary body partsreproductive structures
A student climbs up a rocky mountain trail in Maine. She sees many small pieces of rock on the path. Which action most likely made the small pieces of rock?sand blowing into cracksleaves pressing down tightlyice breaking large rocks apartshells and bones sticking together
Which of the following heat exchange processes involves the collision of particles?insulationconductionconvectionradiation
The most effective way to show a change happening over time is to display your results using aline graph.Venn diagram.pie chart.flow chart.
The diet of a brown bear includes roots, grasses, berries, nuts, fish, insects, and mammals. Based on this description, in what category is a brown bear?carnivoreherbivoreomnivoredecomposer
A bracket fungus grows on a dead tree and breaks it down into chemical nutrients. What term best classifies the role of a bracket fungus in this ecosystem?producerconsumerparasitedecomposer
The comet Shoemaker-Levy struck the planet Jupiter in July of 1994. The process of a comet striking a planet is an example of a net decrease in kinetic energy. Kinetic energy was ultimately converted intolight.radiation.thermal energy.electromagnetic energy.
An earthquake in the Earth's crust under the ocean releases sound waves. Which statement accurately describes how the sound waves spread?They spread in all directions away from their source.They remain trapped near the source by water pressure.They travel mostly horizontally along the ocean floor.They travel mostly upward toward the surface of the water.
Which provides the oldest evidence for oxygen accumulation in Earth's atmosphere?the earliest fossils of animalsthe earliest sediments of oxidized rockimpact craters of oxidized-iron asteroidsextensive volcanic calderas of similar age
Louis Pasteur discovered that the bacteria in a substance can be killed by heating the substance for a short period of time. Which of these practices benefited most from Pasteur's discovery?storing foods for longer periods of timebuilding ovens and other heating devicescreating medicines that cure infectionstransporting living organisms without injuring them
How do traits of animals such as ear shape, nose shape, and hair color most often get passed to offspring?sexual reproductionasexual reproductionadaptationinstinct
Why is the ozone content of the stratosphere important to living organisms?Ozone absorbs infrared radiation from the Sun.Ozone absorbs ultraviolet radiation from the Sun.Ozone is necessary to create oxygen for living things.Ozone in the atmosphere prevents radiation of heat from Earth.
If an environment becomes warmer and drier, the change that would most likely help a species adapt would be an increase in itsamount of body fat.amount of body hair.ability to climb trees.ability to store water.
Thousands of years ago, several species of large mammals existed in North America. These species became extinct not long after the first human settlement of North America. Which human activity most likely contributed to the extinction of these mammals?huntingwaterway pollutionhabitat destructioncompetition for resources
Which of the following is an example of a behavioral adaptation?hooves of a horsemigration of birdsa spider weba bee hive
Which two processes could result in the formation of high mountains with well-rounded peaks?volcanic eruptions and global warmingearthquakes and tidal activitycollision of crustal plates and erosionproduction of greenhouse gases and weathering
The brown tree snake is a nonnative species found on the South Pacific island of Guam. The brown tree snake population in Guam is so large that it negatively affects the humans there. Which statement best explains why the brown tree snake has flourished in Guam?There are many animals for food.There are no natural snake predators.The climate is ideal for snake reproduction.The vegetation provides good habitat for hunting.
How are droughts always different from floods?They have different locations.They happen in different ecosystems.They have different amounts of water.They happen at different times of the year.
Which of the following is a harmful waste material that leaves the blood and travels through the lungs before leaving the body?CO2.O2.H2O.NaCl.
How are a tree and grass alike?Both make wood.Both have roots.Both need moonlight.Both have short lives.
What organ system in the human body contains the pituitary gland, hypothalamus gland, and thyroid gland?reproductive systemexcretory systemendocrine systemcirculatory system
Which term describes an organism's ability to maintain a stable internal environment?reproductionextinctionlocomotionregulation
Which of the following can provide the human body with long-term immunity against some diseases?antibioticsvitaminsvaccinesred blood cells
Which event is most likely to increase the genetic variation in a population of organisms?improved hunting techniquesgreater environmental stressincreased immigrationintroduced predators
Where would animals and plants be most affected by a flood?low areashigh areaswarm areascold areas
Which seismic wave phenomenon, found at structural boundaries, allows scientists to interpret the interior structure of Earth?refraction of wavesgeneration of new wavestransformation of transverse waves into longitudinal wavestransformation of mechanical waves into electromagnetic waves
When ice melts, it becomes agas.solid.liquid.plasma.
Which combination of letters could be used as a chemical symbol for an element?BRChlDyFeO
How is the stratosphere different from the troposphere?The clouds in the stratosphere produce more rain.The air in the stratosphere has a greater density.The composition of the stratosphere lacks ozone.The temperature of the stratosphere warms at higher altitude.
If a student gets a chemical splashed into an eye, what is the most appropriate first action to be taken?wipe it with a paper towelcall 911 for emergency serviceshave someone go get the school nurseflush the eye with water at an eyewash station
Which of the following best describes an advantage of using a mass production manufacturing system instead of a custom manufacturing system?Customers can provide specific feedback to workers.Workers become skilled in all aspects of assembly.Goods can be easily modified for customers.Products can be made at a lower cost.
Which adaptation allows a walrus to stay warm in cold water?reddish coatbristly mustachewrinkled skinthick layer of blubber
Ninety-nine percent of the mass of an atom is located inthe outermost energy level.the first energy level.the electron clouds.the nucleus.
Which of the following is a common renewable resource found in deserts?biodieseluraniumnatural gassolar energy
Beaver dams can cause floods. This statement shows howanimal growth is affected by environmental conditionsanimal behavior may affect the environmentan animal's health depends on its environmentan animal's development depends on its environment
A scientist crosses a red-flowered plant with a white-flowered plant, and all offspring have red flowers. What will most likely result if these red-flowered offspring are crossed with white-flowered plants?All of the offspring will have red flowers.All of the offspring will have white flowers.The offspring will have either red or white flowers.The offspring will have neither red nor white flowers.
Genetically modified plants with new characteristics have been produced through genetic engineering methods. What impacts have resulted from the use of genetically modified plants?decreases in farm productiondecreases in corn, soybean, cottonseed, and canola oilsincreases in time required to plant, grow, and harvest cropsincreases in resistance to herbicides, insects, and viral diseases
Which best explains the importance of nitrogen in the cycling of energy and matter?Nitrogen increases protein production in plants.Nitrogen decreases protein production in plants.Nitrogen decreases the effectiveness of photosynthesis.Nitrogen increases the effectiveness of photosynthesis.
Which of these mixtures would be easiest to separate?Fruit saladPowdered lemonadeHot chocolateInstant pudding
If you wanted to be able to look at the stars, the planets, and the Moon more closely, what should you use?TelescopePeriscopeMicroscopeMagnifying glass
Which of the following is a correct food chain?human -> corn -> cowcorn -> human -> cowcorn -> cow -> humancow -> human -> corn
Which of these is directly formed as a result of weathering and erosion?crystalssedimentsigneous rocksmetamorphic rocks
Most underground caves are formed by the action of water ongranitelimestonesandstoneshale
A group of students is taking a hike along a stream channel. One student picks up a rock from the stream and notices that the rock is very smooth and round. Which type of weathering most likely shaped the rock?abrasionexfoliationfracturingoxidation
Which of the following is most likely to make a rock crack and crumble?dew evaporating on the rockleaves decaying on the rocksnow melting in a crack in the rockwater freezing in a crack in the rock
Which is the most likely reason why scientific theories change?public opinions changeretiring scientists are replacedmore money is spent on sciencescientists make new observations
A plant produces tiny plants around the edges of its leaves. When these tiny plants fall to the ground, they take root and become new plants. This process is an example ofsexual reproductionasexual reproductionevolutionextinction
A function of a plant's roots is toprotect the plant.absorb water and minerals.remove waste products.take in food for the plant.
In order for sediments to become rock, the sediments are generallymixed with organic material.returned to their origins.compacted.liquefied.
When bedrock in Massachusetts is examined, it often appears scraped and polished. Which of the following most likely caused the bedrock to appear scraped and polished?crustal deformationfrequent earthquakesglacial movementvolcanic eruptions
Endothermic reactions are reactions that require more energy to start than they give off in the products. Which statement describes an endothermic reaction?It gives off heat energy and is hot to the touch.It absorbs heat energy and is cold to the touch.It gives off light energy and produces visible light.It gives off water and is wet to the touch.
Which pair of English and metric units has most nearly the same value?liter and quartgram and ouncekilogram and poundkilometer and mile
Students are studying the classifications of stars and they learned that the majority of stars are similar to the Sun. What can the students conclude knowing that most of the stars in the galaxy are like the Sun?Most of the stars will become black holes.Most of the stars are main sequence stars.Most of the stars are protostars.Most of the stars are red giants.
Mosquitoes have adapted to detect carbon dioxide using certain sensory nerves. Mosquitoes instinctually move toward greater concentrations of carbon dioxide. What is the importance of this adaptation?It helps mosquitoes find food.It helps mosquitoes find mates.It helps mosquitoes find clean air.It helps mosquitoes find shelter.
Which unit can be used to describe an object's length?gramsminuteslitersmeters
Meteorologists categorize hurricanes based on the Saffir-Simpson scale. The scale measures the intensity and destructive potential of hurricanes. Which factor has the most significant effect on the strength of a hurricane?the initial speed of a hurricanethe direction that the hurricane rotatesthe number of hurricanes that form in a yearthe temperature of the water below the hurricane
Multicellular organisms grow in size by producing morecells.organs.heart muscle.chlorophyll.
Which a molecular process found only in retroviruses?reverse translationtranslationreverse transcriptiontranscription
A group of students are observing a fish tank for a school assignment. The group is to share the observations with the class. Which statement about observations is true?Observations should always be recorded.Observations should be collected only once.Observations are only collected by scientists.Observations are always correct if used in a chart.
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_{3}) is commonly known as baking soda. Sodium bicarbonate is a white solid that can dissolve in water. Under the proper conditions, sodium bicarbonate can release carbon dioxide (CO_{2}) gas. Which of the following is not a physical property of sodium bicarbonate?It is white.It is a solid.It can dissolve in water.It releases carbon dioxide.
To help it survive, an organism has a capsule, endospore, and pili. To which group does this organism belong?bacteriamolluskinsectreptile
What advantage is gained by using radio telescopes as opposed to optical telescopes?viewed images are cleareroperation is less complexability to see through clouds and dustability to take up less space
The process by which organisms with favorable variations reproduce at higher rates than those without such variations isdisruptive selection.natural selection.sexual selection.directional selection.
Competition is most likely to occur between which two organisms?deer and butterfliesowls and bacteriagoldfish and rabbitsgrass and strawberry plants
Some animals, such as squirrels, may bury acorns. Which of the following is most likely to happen to the acorns after they have been buried?The acorns will be carried away by the wind.The acorns will attach to another organism.The acorns will have a chance to sprout.The acorns will turn into fossils.
Why are most fossils found in sedimentary rocks?Sedimentary rocks are not very old.Organisms live only in areas with sedimentary rock.Organisms can be preserved in sedimentary rock.Sedimentary rocks are found only at the surface of the ground.
Which model is used by scientists to determine the properties of elements?a Punnett squarethe Periodic Tablea pedigree chartthe rock cycle
Life is more likely to be found on a planet whose atmosphere contains abundantneon.oxygen.hydrogen.sulfur dioxide.
Approximately how long does Earth take to complete its orbit around the Sun?one dayone monthone yearone century
A student describes a substance as lacking a definite shape. The description also states that the particles of matter are close to each other but still able to flow past each other. Which type of substance is the student most likely describing?solidliquidmixturecompound
Electron transport in mitochondria results in a chemiosmotic gradient of which particle across the mitochondrial membrane?ADPATPprotonsneutrons
At science conventions, scientists present their research, and members of the audience can discuss or ask questions about the research. The main value of these science conventions is that they allow scientists tosee new places.find money for projects.practice public speaking.exchange their ideas.
When a boy stands in a field in the sunlight, he usually is able to see hisweighttemperaturereflectionshadow
In the human body, which system functions primarily to defend the body against disease?digestiveimmunenervousrespiratory
The moon goes through phases as it revolves around Earth. During which phase of the moon would it be possible for a solar eclipse to occur?new moonfull moonwaningwaxing
Which of these is the most common result of greenhouse gases altering the atmosphere of Earth?an increase in the air temperaturea decrease in the air densityan increase in the intensity of visible lighta decrease in the thickness of the ozone layer
A student was taking notes while the teacher was discussing cells. Which of these is a statement that the teacher most likely made?Most cells have the same shape.The shape of a cell depends upon its function.Cells that carry information are round and disk-shaped.Blood cells that move through the body are long and thread-like.
What goal does taxonomy accomplish?explains the differences between living organismsclassifies living organisms into groupspredicts the types of undiscovered organismsestablishes relationships of organisms with their habitats
The fusion reaction that fuels the Sun converts hydrogen intocarbon.iron.neon.helium.
The main function of hormones in the human body is toidentify and destroy microbesregulate body functionstransport blood to cellsstore energy
Which gas, when condensed into its liquid state in the atmosphere, forms clouds?methanenitrogenwater vaporcarbon dioxide
Fertilizers added by farmers to the soil contain high amounts of nitrates. How do fertilizers affect the nitrogen cycle?More nitrates are available for plants to absorb.More nitrates are available for animals to eat.More nitrogen gas is released into the atmosphere.More nitrogen is converted by bacteria into nitrates.
A scientist is comparing two body cells of a multicellular organism. Which of the following is most likely identical?shape of cell wallsnumber of mitochondriashape of cell membranesnumber of chromosomes
Organisms that consume wastes to obtain the nutrients they need to survive are classified asdecomposersherbivorespredatorsproducers
In the 1600s, Galileo Galilei studied the moons of Jupiter. What did Galileo do to make better observations?invented the microscopewrote a book about the planetscreated a model of the solar systemmade improvements to the telescope
Which of these provides the best evidence that Earth's crust is divided into tectonic plates?the distribution of water on Earth's surfacethe distribution of biomes on Earth's surfacethe distribution of rock types on Earth's surfacethe distribution of earthquakes on Earth's surface
What causes the soil in a flood plain to be generally rich in nutrients?constantly flowing watermany fish in the rivernew soil deposited by the riverwarm water from an ocean
Which characteristic is common to all reptile species?endothermic (warm-blooded)slimy skinectothermic (cold-blooded)hairy skin
Scientists working for a company are testing a new medicine that they think will help heal damaged tissue. In which part of the company are the scientists working?distributionmass marketingpublic relationsresearch
Most of Earth's surface is covered bysandtreeswatermountains
The chemical equation below shows reactants and products. 6CO_{2} + 12H_{2}O + light + enzymes -> C_{6}H_{12}O_{6} + 6O_{2} + 6H_{2}O Which statement is best supported by analyzing this equation?CO_{2} is made from the chemical reaction.No new compounds are made from this reaction.O_{2}, oxygen gas, is needed to make the reaction start.The atoms rearrange in the chemical reaction so that C_{6}H_{12}O_{6}, glucose, is made.
In a desert environment, cactus wrens often build their nests in cholla cacti to avoid predators. This behavior does not hurt the cacti. Which type of relationship do cactus wrens and cholla cacti demonstrate?competitivecommensalismmutualismparasitism
The Davis Mountains in West Texas used to be taller than they are now. Which of the following conditions most likely caused the mountains to become shorter over time?Heat and pressureSoil depositionRain and windRiver formation
Photosynthesis is the process that converts carbon dioxide and water intocarbon and oxygen.sugar and hydrogen.sugar and oxygen.nitrogen and carbon.
Which statement best describes the organization of the Periodic Table of the Elements?All gases are grouped together.Gases easily form compounds with other elements.Elements within a group have similar properties.Elements within a period have the same number of electrons.
Signs in many stores and restaurants warn that microwaves are in use. What is the main reason for this warning?Some people do not like food cooked in microwave ovens.Microwaves sometimes affect people's sense of sight.Microwaves sometimes cause hair or teeth to fall out.Some people have pacemakers that may be affected by microwaves.
A scientist studies the remains of two extinct animals to learn more about how they lived. She determines that one animal was a carnivore and the other was an herbivore. Which of the following did the scientist most likely compare to make this conclusion?the number of bones in the animalsthe size of the animalsthe body covering of the animalsthe skull of the animals
Human actions can change the rate at which soil erodes. Which of the following would most likely slow the rate of soil erosion?applying nitrogen-rich fertilizerskeeping grasses trimmed shortbuilding houses on stiltsplanting trees along cliffs
Which ability is the most useful for making observations?sensesmemorycreativityimagination
Sterling silver is a combination of silver and copper. Which of the following is also a combination of two or more metals?aluminum.lead.gold.brass.
The cows in a rancher's herd of cattle have been selectively bred to produce milk. Which of the following will cause the next generation of cows to receive the trait for producing large quantities of milk?nutrients in the cows' foodessential minerals in the cows' waterelectrical impulses in the cows' brainsinformation in the cows' chromosomes
What is the correct explanation for why we have day and night on Earth?The Sun orbits around the Earth.Earth orbits around the Sun.Earth turns on its axis.The Sun turns on its axis.
The body maintains equilibrium through a series of messages called a feedback mechanism. What organ releases hormones that maintain balanced glucose levels?liverbloodfat cellspancreas
Environmental organizations have asked businesses to take action to reduce waste. Which of the following changes could a business make in order to become more “environmentally friendly”?Purchase only recycled paper and paper products.When making photocopies, print on only one side of the paper.Purchase wood products manufactured only in other countries.When packing boxes, use Styrofoam™ filler instead of old newspapers.
The sound heard when a piano key is hit is caused byvibration.refraction.momentum.acceleration.
Wolves kill many elk every year and often attack old, sick, and injured members of a herd. Which of the following best describes the role of the wolves in the wolf-elk relationship?competitorhostparasitepredator
Which of the following is produced when sugar is digested in an animal cell?carbon dioxide.chlorophyll.oxygen.sunlight.
Which of these groups contains single-celled organisms?birdsplantsfungusanimals
Students studying rocks notice that in a particular location there are many igneous rocks that are very similar. This observation best supports which statement?A nearby volcano is tall.A nearby volcano is inactive.A nearby volcano is about to erupt.A nearby volcano had once been active.
Shale is a sedimentary rock that can be metamorphosed into slate bycementation.chemical weathering.sedimentation.increased pressure.
Plants need iron to grow. What parts of plants take in iron?rootsflowersstemsleaves
Which of the following is the best observation of the refraction of light?Looking at oneself in a mirrorLooking at a shadow of an objectViewing an object through an open windowViewing an object partially in water
A group of students investigated the effect of water temperature on the gill movements of goldfish. The students tested water temperatures from 20°C to 10°C at 2-degree intervals. The data showed that as water temperature decreased, the average number of gill movements per minute by the goldfish also decreased. Which type of display is BEST used to show this relationship?a bar grapha pie charta line grapha tally chart
The directions for making a proteinresult in DNA.are carried by DNA.result in amino acids.are carried by amino acids.
Denise was driving east over a hill in the afternoon, shortly after a rain shower. Suddenly the sun broke through the clouds, and she saw a rainbow ahead of her. Which of the following made the rainbow possible?Sunlight can be separated into all the colors of the rainbow.Water reflects sunlight like a mirror to make it look colored.Overhead black clouds reflect in puddles to cause a mirage.Air pollution causes the sky to look colored under these conditions.
Rhea is a moon of Saturn. Which of these facts about Rhea best indicates that it does not have a water cycle in which water changes state?Its radius is 765 km.Its density is about 1.3 kg/m3.Its period of rotation is about 4.5 Earth days.Its temperature is between -174°C and -220°C.
Which two factors determine the gravitational attraction between two objects?time and temperatureshape and orbital speedcolor and hardnessmass and distance apart
When a red bull (RR) is bred with a white cow (WW), a roan calf (RW) is sometimes produced. If a roan bull (RW) is bred with a roan cow (RW), what is the most likely outcome of the offspring?1 red, 1 white, and 2 roan0 red, 1 white, and 3 roan2 red, 2 white, and 0 roan0 red, 0 white, and 4 roan
Which adaptive feature most helps a baby jaguar survive the first few weeks of life?the ability to roarthe ability to hunta diet of land mammalsbeing born during spring months
Frank needs to move a box by sliding it across the floor. Which two factors will most strongly affect how hard Frank needs to push the box?The density of the box material and the hardness of the floorThe thickness of the box material and the hardness of the floorThe total mass of the box and the friction between the box and the floorThe total height of the box and the distance between his hands and the floor
An ocean, a forest, and a grassy meadow are each examples of a complete ecosystem. Complete ecosystems contain onlyanimals.rocks and water.living and nonliving things.populations of plants and animals.
The Great Basin in Nevada is characterized by uplifted, tilted blocks forming mountain ranges and downthrown blocks forming basins. What rock type is MOST likely to form in the basins?metamorphicsedimentaryintrusive igneousextrusive igneous
As the human population increases, more fossil fuels are being used. The burning of fossil fuels produces greenhouse gases. How might humans reduce greenhouse gases?Buy cars that use gasoline.Build power plants that use coal.Use renewable resources to generate power.Use nonrenewable resources to generate power.
Which situation would most likely cause an object to travel in a circular motion?one force acting on the object in the opposite direction of the motiontwo forces acting on the object in the same direction as the motionone force acting on the object perpendicular to the direction of the motiontwo forces acting on the object in different directions to the motion
Which of the following does not give an example of how sparrows use resources in their environment to survive?Sparrows breathe air.Sparrows drink water.Sparrows use the sun for food.Sparrows use plants for shelter.
Henry and Emily are building a tree house. Which tool should be used to measure the height of the door?hammermeter stickbalancestopwatch
Windy, cloudy, rainy, and cold are words that help describeevaporationdepositionmatterweather
All these statements concerning galaxies are accurate exceptThey contain millions of stars.Most can be seen without a telescope.They are millions of light-years apart.Space contains several billion galaxies.
Hydrogen gas and oxygen gas combine to form water. Which would be a more concise way of expressing what happens in this chemical reaction?write a chemical formulawrite a chemical equationdescribe the rearrangement of the atomsdescribe the procedure for creating this change
What safety equipment should be taken on all field trips?glovesfire extinguisherfirst-aid kitgoggles
The surface gravity of Pluto is the weakest of the nine planets because Plutohas the lowest temperature.has the smallest mass.rotates the slowest.is farthest from the Sun.
If a class wants to measure the speed of a bicycle during an outdoor lab exercise, which two devices would be most useful?stopwatch and camerabinoculars and tape measurebinoculars and camerastopwatch and tape measure
When sunlight shines on a plant, its leavesmake food.absorb water.produce seeds.take in oxygen.
Toads lay their eggs in ponds. Tadpoles hatch from the eggs and eat the plants floating in the pond. Which resource is most important for toads to survive?grassrockstreeswater
Which structure surrounds and protects an animal cell?NucleusVacuoleCytoplasmCell membrane
A ball is thrown straight up. Which statement best describes the motion of the ball while the ball is at the maximum height?The speed and acceleration are constant.The velocity is zero, and the acceleration is constant.The speed and acceleration are changing.The velocity is zero, and the acceleration is changing.
Which organ is most responsible for oxygen entering the blood stream?nosetracheabronchilungs
Why is a healthy diet important?It maintains a constant body temperature.It prevents damage to internal organs.It makes oxygen for all the cells in the body.It supplies the body’s needs for growth and energy.
In the human body, the breaking down of food into simple substances occurs in thedigestive system.excretory system.circulatory system.respiratory system.
Which of the following processes is an important part of star formation?nuclear fusionnuclear fissionmolecular fusionmolecular fission
Carlos puts a new battery into a radio. What does the battery supply to the radio that makes it turn on?frictionelectricitya sound wavea magnetic field
What may form as a direct result of a star collapsing?constellationgalaxyprotostarsupernova
A shoe manufacturer randomly selects 10% of the production from each shift. Each of these shoes is checked to ensure that it is correctly made. What is this process called?quality controlproduct distributionproduction selectionresearch and development
Some materials are electrical conductors. Which material best conducts electricity?copperplasticrubberwood
Angela wants to report daily weather conditions. In which unit should Angela record the air temperature?degrees Celsiuscentimetersmillilitersgrams
Which organisms use the energy from the remains of dead animals and recycle the nutrients back into the environment?producersherbivoresomnivoresdecomposers
Which is the first step in a design process?Revise the solution.Describe the problem.Test the possible solutions.Identify possible solutions.
What type of chemical reaction occurs when the body breaks down fats and sugars that supply it with energy?endothermicexothermicelectricalphysical
Intense heat and pressure in Earth's crust can change sandstone into quartzite. During this metamorphosis, many properties of these rocks change. Which property of these rocks will most likely remain the same?massvolumecrystal structureparticle shape
How do decomposers obtain their food?hunting and killing prey for foodchanging carbon dioxide and water into foodabsorbing food from dead organismsproducing food from oxygen and sunlight
A ball on a cart is moving at a rate of 2 m/s. The cart suddenly stops and the ball continues to travel in the same direction at the same speed. This is an example of thelaw of gravity.first law of motion.second law of motion.third law of motion.
Why is it important to have a large sample size in an investigation?to be able to compare resultsto increase the validity of the datato form the best conclusionto ensure the procedure is followed
Burt used a spoon to stir soup that was cooking on his stove. Which spoon will stay the coolest while he stirs?an iron spoonan aluminum spoona wooden spoona silver spoon
Which is a distinction between an epidemic and a pandemic?the symptoms of the diseasethe geographical area affectedthe species of organisms infectedthe season in which the disease spreads
When two bumper cars collide, some of the kinetic energy of the cars is transformed. Which form of energy is most likely formed as a result of this collision?electricalelectromagneticmagneticsound
Which statement describes all matter?All matter contains carbon.All matter contains oxygen.All matter is made up of cells.All matter is made up of atoms.
Carbon dioxide is removed from Earth's atmosphere byanimal respiration.decaying organisms.plant photosynthesis.burning fossil fuels.
A water company uses lab tests on the water supply before sending the water through pipes to people's homes. How do these lab tests help people?by adding minerals and nutrients to the waterby checking the water to make sure it is safe to drinkby filtering chemicals and organisms out of the waterby stopping harmful substances from entering the water
What safety rule is most important for students to follow when working with acids and bases?wear nose plugsput on safety gogglesput away all lab supplieswear heavy cloth gloves
A person in a dark room looking through a window can clearly see a person outside in the daylight. But a person outside cannot see the person inside. Why does this happen?There is not enough light being reflected off the person in the room.Light rays cannot pass through a window twice.Outside light does not pass through windows.Sunlight is not as intense as other sources of light.
Many processes on Earth occur at or near tectonic plate boundaries. Which geological events are most common along tectonic plate boundaries?erosion and depositionhurricanes and tornadoesearthquakes and volcanoestidal waves and sedimentation
Two pool (billiard) balls collide, causing each to move in a different direction. Eventually, both come to a stop. The most important factor in causing them to stop isbalance.friction.gravity.size.
Which of these provides the best evidence that the environment of Earth has changed over millions of years?active migration of sand dunespolished appearance of rock surfacesmarine fossils found in mountainsbones of animals found on the ground
Which physical characteristic do some organisms have that helps them survive in the Arctic?growing tall to hide in treeschanging fur color to hide from predatorsdeveloping large paws to protect themselves from the windproducing shallow root systems to protect themselves from the cold air
Which of the following occurs during photosynthesis?CO2 is used to produce water.CO2 is absorbed by mitochondria.CO2 and H2O are converted to carbohydrates.CO2 and H2O are combined into carbonic acid.
A common characteristic of all living things is that theybreathe air.walk upright.are made of cells.use sunlight for growth.
In the solar system, moons orbit planets. Which of these do planets orbit?the SunHalley's cometthe asteroid belta black hole
Visible light is which type of wave?seismicmechanicallongitudinalelectromagnetic
In some national parks, controlled fires are maintained by firefighters. Which of these is one of the major reasons for using controlled burns to maintain certain ecosystems?to give nonnative plants a chance to colonize the regionto prevent the spread of pests that cause damage to plantsto replace matured plants with saplings of the same speciesto rid the forest floor of accumulated deadwood and brush
Which of the following actions is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral sample?heating the sample on a hot platescratching the sample with a nailhitting the sample with a hammershining a bright light on the sample
In Costa Rica a small tree, the acacia, provides shelter and food for ants. The ants protect the acacia by removing other insects and vines that might harm it. Which term best describes the relationship between the acacia and the ants?competitionmutualismparasitismpredation
A car skids along the road and smoke appears to be coming from under the tires. The heat that produces the smoke is caused bymagnetismsoundlightfriction
A glacier sometimes leaves behind large chunks of ice. What is left in the ground when these chunks of ice melt?a valleya kettlea cratera sinkhole
A student uses a high-efficiency gasoline lawnmower to cut grass. The term "high efficiency" is used to indicate that the lawnmowercuts better than other lawnmowers.is easier to use than other lawnmowers.uses less energy than other lawnmowers.requires more fuel than other lawnmowers.
Which example would result in new cells that are most different from the parent cells?yeast cells splitting into new cellsbacteria cells dividing into new cellsskin cells dividing to produce more skin cellssperm and egg cells uniting to produce fertilized egg cells
A dog gets the energy it needs to run from ___.the airthe Sunfoodwater
Certain flowers will open for twelve hours and then close. Which stimulus do the flowers respond to when they open and then when they close for that time period?light levelsmoon phasesseasonal temperaturescarbon dioxide levels
Smoking harms the body in many ways. It is most harmful to which organ?lungkidneyliverstomach
In 1609, Galileo Galilei used lenses to construct the first telescope. His telescope allowed him to observe many objects in space. His invention of the telescope and the data he gathered directly contributed to the understanding thatEarth is the center of the universe.the planets revolve around the Sun.all stars eventually explode.the universe has many galaxies.
The energy obtained from food is measured in units calledwattsCaloriesdegreespounds
Which part of the body works closely with the digestive system to transport nutrients to the cells?lungsbloodkidneysesophagus
An example of a learned behavior isdriving a carhaving blue eyesshivering in the coldbreathing air
Iron oxides, such as rust, form when iron metal reacts with oxygen in the air. What are the chemical symbols for the two elements found in iron oxide?I and OIr and OFe and OPb and O
When water evaporates from Earth's surface into the atmosphere, its molecules enter the gas state. What change in this gas causes molecules to condense into the small water droplets that form clouds?The mass is reduced.The volume is increased.The temperature is reduced.The pressure is increased.
Which process directly adds carbon into the atmosphere?increasing plant populationsdecreasing animal populationsburning fossil fuelsforming sedimentary rock
Scientists think that dolphins and whales may have evolved from a common ancestor. What evidence supports this hypothesis?They swim the same way.They eat the same food.They live in the same area of the ocean.They have similar anatomies.
A particular organism is able to survive in an environment due to a thick layer of fat beneath its skin. In which situation would the layer of fat most likely be a survival advantage?swimming in arctic waterseating large amounts of fishbeing preyed upon by other animalsliving in an environment with high temperatures
Which technology was developed most recently?cellular telephonetelevisionrefrigeratorairplane
A student hypothesizes that algae are producers. Which question will best help the student determine if this is correct?Do algae consume other organisms?Which organisms consume algae?Do algae use sunlight to make food?Could an ecosystem survive without algae?
Soccer players use their muscle systems to kick a ball into a goal. What organ system coordinates the muscles?The nervous systemThe endocrine systemThe respiratory systemThe circulatory system
Planets in the solar system are in constant motion. What factor has the greatest effect on the orbits of the planets?the size of the planetsgravitational pull of the Sunthe composition of the planetselectromagnetic radiation from the Sun
How is a pond different from a lake?Ponds have moving water.Ponds are smaller and shallower.Ponds are not surrounded by land.Ponds have a different amount of salt.
A substance with a mass of 10 g is heated to produce two new substances. The mass of the first new substance is 9.3 g and the mass of the second new substance is 0.7 g. Which of the following is best demonstrated by this example?heat transferphysical changelaw of conservation of masslaw of conservation of energy
The cilia in the respiratory system are responsible for preventing dirt and mucus from entering the bronchial tubes and lungs. If the cilia are damaged, the person's bronchial tubes and lungs are most likely toclose to prevent further damage.stop producing mucus.become clogged.become efficient.
Which two traits would best distinguish a bird from other vertebrates?fur and wingsgills and feetfeathers and wingsmoist skin and feet
A green plant absorbs light. A frog eats flies. These are both examples of how organismsobtain energyescape predatorsproduce offspringexcrete waste
Which of these scientific advances occurred first?the invention of the telescopethe building of submarinesthe generation of electricitythe breeding of plants
Which instrument measures atmospheric pressure?barometerhygrometerthermometermagnetometer
Which of the following is produced during the process of cellular respiration?carbon dioxidesodium chlorideoxygensugar
An anemometer is a tool that measureswind direction.wind speed.air pressure.air temperature.
The element cesium, Cs, is an alkali metal. Which chemical formula represents a cesium compound that is likely to exist?CsClCsCl_{2}CsOCsO_{2}
The cells of a plant help the plant maintain its life functions. What part of a plant cell has the function of producing sugar in the presence of sunlight?chloroplastcytoplasmmitochondrianucleus
A sample of sulfur forms crystals when itmelts.freezes.evaporates.condenses.
When a person is infected with the influenza virus, the immune system defends the body through a cell-mediated immune response. Which immune cell is responsible for protecting the body from the influenza virus infection?phagocytesB lymphocyteshelper T lymphocytescytotoxic T lymphocytes
Which form of solar radiation causes sunburn?VisibleUltravioletInfraredX-raysRadio waves
About 75% of the world's active volcanoes are the result of tectonic activity around which plate?North American PlateAfrican PlatePacific PlateNazca Plate
Which of the following is the most accurate measurement for the length of an object that is actually 15.0 m long?15.35 m15.2 m14.55 m14.5 m
After a rainfall, which process in the water cycle draws the water back up into the air?condensationevaporationcirculationprecipitation
When a person speaks, the type of wave produced can be described as all these excepttransverse.mechanical.compression.longitudinal.
Bill stands in a swimming pool and notices that the water around his feet is a lot cooler than the water near the surface. Which process causes this difference in temperature?convectionevaporationradiationconduction
Andy adds a small amount of water to sand and makes shapes with the wet sand. Which of these best describes the wet sand?a mixturea solutionan elementa compound
To observe materials up close and in greater detail we usegripping tools.optical tools.cutting tools.polishing tools.
Joyce is conducting a traffic survey and needs to find out how many cars cross the crosswalk in the morning before the school bell rings. How should she collect this data?Make a tally chartDraw a pictographTake a picture of each passing carWrite down the cars' license plate numbers
A student conducts an experiment to determine the average size of acorn that squirrels eat. The student gave several different sizes of acorns to a squirrel. Which action would most likely improve the results?change the food sourceuse more than one squirrelincrease the number of studentsshorten the period of observation
India is in the Northern Hemisphere and Australia is in the Southern Hemisphere. In June, it is summer in India and winter in Australia. What is the main reason the seasons are opposite in the two countries?because Earth is tilted on its axisbecause the Sun rotates on its axisbecause Earth revolves around the Sunbecause of the distance between the countries
What contributes the most to beach erosion?animal activityevaporationprecipitationwave action
Which type of graph would best display the changes in temperature over a 24 hour period?line graphpictographcircle (pie) graphstem-and-leaf graph
Which structure determines the traits that will be passed to offspring?chromosomecentromerenuclear membranespindle fibers
Oak trees produce seeds that are contained in acorns. Blue jays eat the seeds in acorns. Blue jays also collect acorns and hide them in the ground, often far away from the parent oak tree. Blue jays do not eat the seed of every acorn they hide. How do oak trees benefit from blue jays' collecting and hiding acorns?The oak trees are pollinated by the blue jays.The oak trees are protected from other herbivores.The seeds of oak trees are protected from the sun.The seeds of oak trees are planted in new environments.
Which step of the scientific method will follow after a student graphs collected data during a lab experiment?observinghypothesizinganalyzingresearching
Which is a true statement about cells?Plant cells contain chloroplasts.Animal cells are missing a nucleus.Only plant cells have a cell membrane.Animal cells include a rigid wall structure.
Which kind of events can form mountains?earthquakes and volcanoesearthquakes and landslideslandslides and avalanchesvolcanoes and avalanches
During the early 1990s, people began using cell phones to communicate. The development of the cell phone was most likely a response to the need of society tobe able to communicate when sick.provide a safer method of communicating.provide more jobs in the communication industry.be able to communicate when away from home.
Which process uses carbon from the air to make food for plants?growthrespirationdecompositionphotosynthesis
Organisms contain DNA. What makes prokaryotic DNA different from eukaryotic DNA?the molecular shapethe types of basesthe sugar compositionthe presence of phosphates
The changing appearances of the nighttime sky over the surface of Earth and eclipses of the Moon have provided evidence thatEarth is a sphere.Earth supports life.Earth has a layered atmosphere.Earth is covered mostly with water.
Scientists found evidence of past glacial activity in Massachusetts. Which of the following conclusions is best supported by this evidence?Sea levels were much higher in the past.The climate on Earth has changed over time.Total numbers of organisms on Earth have changed over time.The total amount of radiation from the Sun was much higher in the past.
Which statement explains why a mother's unhealthy diet during pregnancy is harmful to her embryo's development?The embryo inherits half its chromosomes from its mother.The embryo receives its food from its mother through the placenta.The embryo receives oxygen through the placenta.The embryo receives mutations carried by its mother.
Which word best describes the physical state of an ice cube?gassolidliquidplasma
All nations need to import and export goods for their economic survival. As a result, many island nations have developed advanced technology for transporting goods byspace.rail.sea.road.
A species of mouse spends the day sleeping in its burrow to avoid high daytime temperatures. It is processing what little water it needs from the seeds it collects. To which environment is this mouse best adapted?rainforestmarinedeserttundra
What system helps the body defend itself against disease while maintaining the levels of body fluids?nervousdigestivelymphaticintegumentary
After fossils are formed, which process is most likely to destroy them?the carbon cyclethe nitrogen cyclethe water cyclethe rock cycle
Which of these causes the MOST evaporation of water from a lake?Freezing of the lakeHeat from the SunMelting snow forming streamsVolcanic activity near the lake
Jeannie put her soccer ball on the ground on the side of a hill. What force acted on the soccer ball to make it roll down the hill?gravityelectricityfrictionmagnetism
Which tools are needed to measure the length and mass of a seashell?a ruler and a balancea ruler and a microscopea balance and a stopwatcha microscope and a magnet
Which statement about the genetic traits of humans is true?Recessive forms of genes are always visible in offspring.Visible traits are the same for each member of a family.Dominant forms of genes are always inherited from both parents.Visible traits depend on the dominant and recessive forms of genes from each parent.
Geotropism is a response by plants to which force?gravityfrictionair pressureEarth's magnetism
In a lake near a farm the growth of algae suddenly increased. This increase was most likely due to which of the following?a decrease in air temperaturea decrease in water levelfertilizer runoff from the farmexhaust gases from farm equipment
Jenna gave a report to her class about the Orion Nebula. She told the class that it was discovered in 1610. Which was most likely the topic of her paper?young starsneutron starsthe death of starsthe classification of stars
Which statement best describes the semiconservative replication sequence of the DNA sequence CCGCAT?identical bases in the same ordercomplementary bases in the same orderidentical bases in the reverse ordercomplementary bases in the reverse order
If the environment in an area is destroyed, a new community of organisms sometimes takes the place of previous communities. The introduction of a new community of organisms is known asevolution.adaptation.biological diversity.ecological succession.
The formula X + ZY -> XZ + Y shows thatX and Y bonded into a more complex molecule.ZY has decomposed into two smaller compounds.X is a more reactive compound than Y.Y has changed into a new compound.
Alisha's teacher glued a needle to a piece of cork so that the needle would float. Then he used a magnet to magnetize the needle. When the needle was placed in a bowl of water, it turned to point north. Which best describes the reason that the needle pointed north?The cork must also have been magnetized.The magnetic field of Earth affected the needle.The magnetic current in the bowl of water affected the needle.The teacher must have placed the magnet to the south of the bowl.
A population of plants growing on an island consisted of two varieties, one with thorns and the other without. Over a period of many years, the variety with thorns gradually disappeared. Which process most likely brought about this change in the plant population?gene flowgenetic driftnatural selectionrandom mutation
While hiking last year, Mike saw a large boulder next to a mountain trail. The boulder had no cracks. While hiking on the trail this year, he saw two large cracks in the boulder. Which of the following most likely caused these cracks to form?shaking from high windspressure from flowing watererosion due to falling rain and snowweathering due to freezing and thawing
Many animals blend in with their environment and can not be easily seen by predators. This is an example of which adaptation?communicatinghibernatingmigratingcamouflaging
Two parent butterflies with normal wings have offspring with altered wing shapes. What most likely caused this change?speciationan adaptationnatural selectiona genetic mutation
Which is most responsible for reflecting incoming solar heat back to space?cloudsmountainsozone layerstrade winds
Which of these is a characteristic of the metal gold?malleablelighter than watermagneticharder than a diamond
Which model can be used to trace genetic inheritance?life cyclepedigree chartfood webenergy pyramid
Which statement best describes an atom with an atomic number of 20?The atom has 20 protons.The atom has 20 neutrons.The sum of the number of protons and electrons is 20.The sum of the number of protons and neutrons is 20.
Scientists have developed an allergy medication from a plant that is part of the rainforest food chain. What concern might develop when producing this medication from the plant?overproduction of the medicationincrease in allergies in rainforest wildlifelack of patients to test the new medicationdecrease in a food source to rainforest wildlife
Granite is a hard material and forms from cooling magma. Granite is a type oflava stoneigneous rockvolcanic dustsedimentary rock
Seismic waves occur as a result of an earthquake. Which statement describes a wave property that makes it possible for scientists to locate the source of an earthquake?The wavelength of a wave is measured from crest to crest.Waves travel uniformly outward from the wave source.The frequency of waves varies in different mediums.Waves move at the same speed in different materials.
Which is most important to do when making directions for an experiment?Name how many experiments have been done.Tell how to do a different experiment.Show the results of the experiment.Write the experiment in order.
A scientist is trying to decide whether an organism is unicellular or multicellular. Which information would help the scientist most to make her decision?size of the cells of the organismwhat the organism eatshow many types of cells are in the organismhow fast the organism grows
During digestion, strong acids are added to food to help break down the food chemically. Into which organ are most of these acids added?small intestinelarge intestinegallbladderstomach
Earth, along with the other planets, revolves around the Sun. The planets revolve in a counterclockwise direction. The cause of the revolution is mostly due to which force?electricalfrictionalgravitationalmagnetic
When placed in a glucose solution, yeast cells will produce bubbles. Which process are the yeast cells carrying out?chemosynthesisphotosynthesisrespirationtranspiration
In order to make a line graph showing the rate of erosion on the banks of a river during a week-long flood, the y-axis should be labeled as the width of the river bank, in meters. The best label for the x-axis is time, inseconds.minutes.hours.days.
A student is investigating the effect of different nutrients on the growth of seedling plants. Which of these would be an independent (manipulated) variable in the investigation?watersunlightsoil nutrientsseedling plants
One type of animal hatches from an egg, breathes through gills when it is young, and mainly lives on land as an adult. Into which group is this animal classified?amphibiansbirdsmammalsreptiles
A science teacher is discussing the immune system with his class. Which statement should the teacher make about this system?It produces new cells to carry oxygen.It produces chemicals to regulate growth.It produces antibodies to fight bacteria.It produces electrical signals to control the body.
Which of the following has been formed on the Asian continent by two continental plates that have been pressing together for millions of years?large fields of gravela tall mountain chainlarge freshwater lakes linked by riversan uneven thickness of sedimentary layers
Before large trees could grow on Earth, what had to happen first?Rocks were eroded to form soil.Molten rock warmed Earth's interior.Earth's gravity accumulated to modern levels.Volcanoes exploded to form mountaintop lakes.
Which is most likely a direct cause of an ear infection?loud noisesforeign bacteriawearing tight hatsdirty ear canals
Scientists believe that oceans once covered much of what is now land. which of these things found on land led scientists to believe this?underground watersand soilfossils of fishsalty lakes
Which of the following is an example of a structural adaptation?a wolf's howlan insect's coloringa fish's fina squirrel storing acorns
Which is made by plants to attract pollinators to flowers?sapoxygennectarcarbon dioxide
When light reaches an eyeglass lens, the light isrefracted.reflected.diffracted.absorbed.
For half an hour, a student watches two different types of flowering bushes and counts the number of butterflies that come to feed on each bush. What would be the best way to show the data?a scatterplota pie charta bar grapha line graph
Where are electrons in an atom located?modelsorbitalsenergy levelselectron clouds
Which energy resource is considered non-renewable?solar energyfossil fuelsgeothermal energyhydroelectric power
Which characteristic is exclusive to chordates?digestive tract with two openingsdorsal hollow nerve tubeclosed circulatory systembony internal skeleton
Land forms are created through destructive forces such as weathering. Which of these is an example of physical weathering?acid rainerosionhydrolysisoxidation
A student placed an ice cube on a plate in the sun. Ten minutes later, only water was on the plate. Which process caused the ice cube to change to water?condensationevaporationfreezingmelting
In Colonial America, people used ice to help keep foods fresh. They cut the ice from lakes and ponds during the winter and stored the ice in ice houses. They sometimes used hay as an insulator to prevent the ice from melting. If you wanted to build an icehouse today, which of the following would be the best material to use as an insulator?dried leavesfoam blocksplastic wraprock salt
Tides, such as those along the coast of Massachusetts, are caused by gravitational attractions acting on Earth. Why is the gravitational attraction of the Moon a greater factor in determining tides than the gravitational attraction of the much larger Sun?Earth is much closer to the Moon than to the Sun.The Sun's gravity is a factor only during the day.The Moon's core has a much greater density than the Sun's core.The Sun's mass is smaller than the mass of the Moon.
A group of students compared the effects of fertilizer on the growth of tomato plants. The students gave six tomato plants Fertilizer 1 and six other tomato plants Fertilizer 2. They grew the plants under the same conditions. After several weeks, the students concluded that the tomato plants that received Fertilizer 1 grew taller than those that received Fertilizer 2. Which of the following actions would have increased the accuracy of the results of this investigation?using different growing conditions for a group of the plantsgrowing a group of tomato plants without fertilizergrowing different types of plants with each fertilizerapplying a combination of fertilizers to all the plants
In order to form water, two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom must bemixed.divided.bonded.dissolved.
What makes up most of a human skeleton?muscleboneskinblood
As water cools to a temperature of zero degrees Celsius and forms ice, water molecules tend tomove farther apart.vibrate rapidly.flow more randomly.gradually expand.
An object composed mainly of ice is orbiting the Sun in an elliptical path. This object is most likelya planet.an asteroid.a meteor.a comet.
Which process occurs during meiosis that contributes to a germ cell having unique genetic material?transcriptionreplicationcrossing overspindle formation
Wave energy from the ocean can be harnessed to power generators to make electricity. Energy from ocean tides can also be used to make electricity. How would you categorize these two sources of energy?Both are renewable.Both are nonrenewable.Wave energy is nonrenewable. Tidal energy is renewable.Wave energy is renewable. Tidal energy is nonrenewable.
Algae are organisms that live in water. Scientists discovered a new type of red algae near Knight Island in Prince William Sound. Which statement is most likely a positive effect of this discovery?Scientists studying the red algae are disturbing local wildlife.The red algae may help scientists better understand local food webs.Visitors to Alaska may want to collect the red algae and take it home.The red algae may be moved by boat to other areas when people travel.
What layer of Earth is located just below the crust?Inner coreMantleContinental shelfOuter core
Which of these daily activities can most directly help reduce air pollution in a city?turning down the volume on the televisionusing biodegradable materialsusing public transportation instead of drivingrecycling paper
Seafloor spreading occurs along certain boundaries in the ocean. Which are most likely to form at the boundary where the seafloor is spreading?strike-slip faultssubduction zonesmid-ocean ridgescontinental shelves
Which method is the best safety procedure when working around open flames?wear an acid-resistant apronwash your handstie back long hairuse an electric fan to blow gases from the flame
Why has only one-half of the Moon ever been observed from Earth?The Moon does not rotate on its axis.The Moon is not visible during the day.The Moon has phases that coincide with its rate of rotation.The Moon rotates at the same rate that it revolves around Earth.
What keeps the Moon orbiting Earth?the Sun's gravitythe Moon's rotationEarth's rotationEarth's gravity
When the roller coaster rolls onto a flat section of track, what force would ultimately bring it to a stop if no other forces are added?gravityweightfrictionacceleration
Which activity would most likely increase water turbidity in a nearby stream?rolling steel into thin sheetsburning coal for electricityclear-cutting a forestplanting a cover crop
Which environmental factor will cause a plant shoot to grow in a direction other than straight up?temperatureamount of top soilamount of waterlocation of the light
What property is the same for each atom of an element?energymass numberatomic numbernumber of neutrons
In a city near the ocean, fog often forms on summer mornings. Which of the following statements best explains how this fog forms?Ocean water evaporates and then condenses in the air.Crashing waves spray tiny drops of ocean water into the air.Water runoff moves toward the ocean and collects near the shore.Rain clouds move in from the ocean and evaporate as they reach the shore.
Which land feature is formed from erosion by waves?a sandbara sea cliffa barrier reefa barrier island
Mr. Thompson's class was discussing the topic of convergent boundaries. He asked four students to identify a landform that was formed through the collision of two tectonic plates. Which landform should the students identify as being formed by convergent boundaries?North American ContinentMid-Atlantic RidgeHawaiian IslandsMarianas Trench
When finished with a laboratory investigation the last thing a student should do is towash hands.tie back long hair.clean all glassware.turn off Bunsen burner.
Nerve impulses are transmitted along structures of a neuron as an action potential. Which part of a neuron receives the stimulation of these impulses?myelin sheathsdendritesnodes of Ranvieraxons
The atmosphere of Earth changed when plant life increased. Before there were plants, the atmosphere contained much lesshydrogen.oxygen.nitrogen.water.
The force of gravitational attraction between two objects depends on the distance between the objects and theirbuoyanciestemperaturesmassesshapes
A student stands outside on a cold winter day. His hands become cold and he rubs them together to make them warmer. Which statement explains why rubbing his hands together makes them warmer?This action produces thermal energy through friction.This action conducts thermal energy away from the body.This action captures thermal energy from the environment.This action reduces the amount of thermal energy transferred to the air.
Which type of air mass forms over the ocean near the equator?moist and warmmoist and cooldry and warmdry and cool
A scientist observes changes in a bee population every day for thirty days. The scientist arranges the data in a pictogram. Which form of data display is most similar to the organization of a pictogram?pie chartline graphbar graphdata table
A student conducts an experiment with potato slices and salt water. The student wants to determine if a higher concentration of salt will affect the amount of water a potato slice absorbs. Which tool would be best to compare the masses of the potato slices?a balancea rulera microscopea graduated cylinder
Weather patterns sometimes result in drought. Which activity would be most negatively affected during a drought year?boatingfarminghikinghunting
Hurricane season for the Atlantic Ocean lasts from June to November. Which factor makes an Atlantic hurricane less likely to form during the month of March?weak trade windscool ocean waterslow humidity ratesstrong wind shears
Scientists study the reaction of some bacteria to antibiotics, hoping to learn about a new strain of resistant bacteria. This method of gaining scientific knowledge is best described asobserving changes in a single trial.testing for a desired trait.repeating steps in a procedure.controlling changes in conditions.
If an atom has five protons and four electrons, the atom isneutral.radioactive.negatively charged.positively charged.
There are some towns located in the valley of the Alpine mountains. During part of the year, these towns stay dark all day because the mountains block the Sun. During which season would the Sun be low enough in the sky that the village stays in the shadows?fallspringsummerwinter
Which of the following is the most likely cause of earthquakes?shifting rock layerscrashing meteoritesrotation of the coremagnetic force
Which best explains the cause of the geysers formed in Yellowstone National Park?erosionearthquakesvolcanic activityartesian springs
There are different types of desert. What do they all have in common?warm winterslong summerslow rainfalllow day and night temperatures
Students are studying liquids that make bubbles. Which question could be answered by using a ruler?Which liquid makes bubbles that are the largest?Which liquid makes bubbles that are the prettiest?Which liquid makes bubbles that are the best smelling?Which liquid makes bubbles that are the most interesting?
Plants use energy directly from the sun. What do they use the energy from the sun for?to make foodto disperse seedsto fertilize the soilto prevent insect damage
Which technique has helped scientists more accurately determine the age of fossils and draw conclusions about changes in organisms over time?time-lapse photographyradioactive datingelectron microscopycolor staining
Which trait do cows and grass have in common?They both make their own food.They both are able to grow.They both take in oxygen to survive.They both get energy directly from the Sun.
Which is considered a renewable resource?oilcoaltreessilver
A lamp converts electrical energy to light energy. In addition to the light energy, much of this electrical energy is also converted tomechanical energychemical energyheat energynuclear energy
When some subatomic particles split from each other, energy is released. What kind of energy is this?chemicalelectricalmechanicalnuclear
For centuries, farmers have been taking cuttings of productive plants and rooting the cuttings to make new plants. Which kind of modern technology uses genetic information most similarly to the cutting and rooting process?genetic engineeringDNA fingerprintingcloning of organismsantibody therapy
Bruce plays his violin every Friday night for the symphony. Before he plays, he plucks each string to see if his violin is in tune. Which is most responsible for the generation of sound waves from his violin?material of the violinvibrations of the stringmovement of the violincomposition of the string
What cycle is most directly affected by the combustion of fossil fuels?rock cyclewater cyclecarbon cyclenitrogen cycle
After Audrey drinks a glass of juice, digestive processes deliver glucose to the bloodstream. From the bloodstream, glucose molecules enter the cell. In order for glucose molecules to be used by the cell, glucose-specific enzymes must do what?bind glucose molecules to each otherevaluate the energy content of the glucosecatalyze a chemical reaction with the glucosetransport the glucose molecules to the nucleus
What type of landform is most likely formed by a divergent tectonic plate boundary?island arcoceanic trenchrift zonefolded mountains
When electricity is used to run appliances in a building, the electricity is measured in kilowatt-hours. Which of these units could be used in place of "kilowatt-hour"?joulenewtonspecific heatthermal expansion
Camels have humps on their backs that store fat, allowing them to survive for many days without food. This makes camels well suited to desert life. This characteristic is an example ofadaptation.instinct.migration.hibernation.
Which two protein molecules are essential for muscle contraction and relaxation?actin and myosincollagen and tubulinhemoglobin and myoglobinamylase and polymerase
The atmosphere of Earth blocks many of the Sun's rays. If weather patterns change and more of the Sun's rays penetrate the atmosphere of Earth, which is most likely to increase?the number of daylight hoursthe evaporation of oceansthe length of each seasonthe pull of gravity
An automobile engine transforms chemical energy of fuel primarily intoelectrical energy and light energy.electrical energy and mechanical energy.thermal energy and light energy.thermal energy and mechanical energy.
Which body system sends electrical signals to all other body systems?circulatory systemdigestive systemmuscular systemnervous system
In what way do bushes benefit from bears eating their berries?Their seeds are spread around.Other predators are scared away.Nearby ground becomes compacted.Their stems and branches are broken.
In the water cycle, after water has condensed to form clouds, it falls back to Earth in the form ofevaporation.vaporization.condensation.precipitation.
Which process will directly result in organic matter being added to the soil?water freezing in cracks of rocksglaciers carving out a valleyriver water eroding the banks of a streambacteria breaking down dead matter
Neutrons are particles of an atom thatare part of the nucleus.are located outside the nucleus.have positive charges.have negative charges.
Divergent tectonic plate boundaries most commonly formocean ridges.ocean trenches.non-volcanic islands.continental mountains.
Which process accounts for the expansion and contraction of rocks?mechanical weatheringorganic decompositionabrasion resistanceheat conduction
A major function of a plant's roots is toproduce flowersrelease oxygentransport carbon dioxidetake in water
Which layer of Earth makes up the smallest percentage of the planet's mass?crustinner coremantleouter core
Earth's mantle, primarily composed of silicate and magnesium oxide rocks, floats on top of the liquid iron and nickel outer core. Which difference between these two layers of Earth resulted in their differentiation?agevelocityviscositydensity
Edith's checkerspot butterfly is a non-migratory species found in distinct populations from Canada to Mexico. Today, populations in southern regions are declining while new populations push the northern limit further north. This range shift provides evidence for the theory ofmass extinction.global warming.gene dominance.natural selection.
Some people carry a mutated allele of a particular gene that makes them resistant to HIV infection and AIDS. Which best describes this type of mutation?beneficialasexualharmfulunicellular
Sodium is a metal with one valence electron. Which of these elements has properties similar to sodium?magnesiumpotassiumaluminumcalcium
Neurons are cells of the nervous system that send and receive signals. From which portion of a cell does a neuron send a signal?somaaxondendritenucleus
After fields of crops are harvested, parts of the plants remain on the ground. For many years, farmers have mixed these plant remains into the soil. Which most likely results from this practice?More minerals are lost from the field.More nutrients in the soil are dissolved.The organic matter in the soil increases.The number of organisms in the soil decreases.
Dalmatian dogs sometimes become deaf due to a recessive trait they may inherit. For this reason, some Dalmatian owners will not let their dogs have puppies if they are deaf. Allowing only Dalmatians that can hear to produce offspring is an example ofselective breeding.sexual reproduction.crossbreeding.learned traits.
Which of these would help determine the changes in a plant species over geologic time?examining the number of plants in a given areaexamining the type of animals that eat the plantexamining the type of seeds the plant producesexamining the fossil record of the plant
The rate at which a wave passes through a medium is known as itsspeed.amplitude.acceleration.wavelength.
A bee depends on certain flowers for food. The flowers depend on the bee tocarry pollen for reproduction.make sugars for photosynthesis.remove wastes for healthy growth.sting herbivores for protection.
Which health issue can be caused directly by a mutation resulting in a continuously growing and dividing cell?respiratory inflammationcancerpoor blood circulationhypertension
Which type of light can cause severe eye damage if it is viewed directly?an infrared lighta laser beaman incandescent lighta Bunsen burner flame
Which is a mineral that forms through evaporative processes?halitesilvergoldquartz
Which atmospheric gas has the greatest effect on the weather conditions associated with an air mass?oxygennitrogenmethanewater vapor
What is an example of a force producing heat?an apple falling from a tree branchdoorbell ringing when a switch is pusheda wagon rolling across a yard when pulledtwo sticks getting warm when rubbed together
What virus structure is similar in function to a cell membrane?protein shellinternal proteintail sheathend plate
What aspect of the DNA molecule encodes hereditary information concerning an organism's traits?the molecular massthe sequence of base pairsthe distribution of electrical chargesthe folded three-dimensional shape
If Jessica has light eyes (bb) and both of her parents have dark eyes (Bb), which statement is true?Jessica inherited both genes from her father.Jessica inherited both genes from her mother.Jessica inherited one recessive form of the gene from each parents from each parent.Jessica inherited one dominant from of the gene from each parent.
The fossils of extinct sea animals called trilobites are found in Ohio. This means Ohio was once covered bygrass.water.forests.mountains.
A student reaches into a bag of objects. Which property of the objects can be observed by using only the sense of touch?colorodortastetexture
According to the rock cycle, when liquid magma cools into a solid, what is formed?lavaglaciersigneous rockmetamorphic rock
Which of the following statements best describes photosynthesis?Carbon dioxide and water are turned into sugar and oxygen.Sugar and oxygen are turned into water and carbon dioxide.Oxygen and carbon dioxide are turned into water and sugar.Water and sugar are turned into oxygen and carbon dioxide.
What part of a plant needs sunlight to do its job?stemrootleafflower
To make an electromagnet, a conductor should be coiled around -a glass tubean iron naila roll of papera wooden stick
Which two solar system objects have the least amount of distance between them?the Sun and MarsEarth and Jupiterthe Sun and EarthEarth and the Moon
Just as biologists classify living things, astronomers classify galaxies. What feature is used to classify galaxies?sizeshapecolorbrightness
Which will most likely cause an earthquake?plates slipping along a faulta hurricane hitting a shorelinewater weathering rocks on the ocean floortidal stresses resulting from the distance between Earth and the Moon
Over time, coal began to form fromsnow and ice.sand and rock.many dead plants.lots of animal bones.
Scientists have monitored the amount of acid rainfall in Frederick County, Maryland, since 1982. Humans in Frederick County are affected by acid rain because acid rain alterswind patternsair temperaturesthe quality of waterthe amount of precipitation
Astronauts weigh more on Earth than they do on the moon becausethey have less mass on the moon.their density decreases on the moon.the moon has less gravity than Earth.the moon has less friction than Earth.
Which of the following would most likely result in an abnormal chromosome number?The deletion of DNA during translation.Mutations occurring during the blastula stage.DNA exposed to radiation after the birth of the organism.Failure of homologous chromosomes to separate during meiosis.
In which group of animals below are all of the members well adapted to living in a forest ecosystem?field mouse, rabbit, pheasantgull, tree frog, grasshoppercoyote, antelope, bisonsquirrel, deer, woodpecker
A telescope would be most useful in answering which question?How do rockets move in space?What shape is a human skin cell?What is on the surface of the Moon?How do worms breathe underground?
The distance between Richmond and Norfolk is best measured in ___.kilometersmeterscentimetersmillimeters
A student is hiking through a forest taking pictures for science class. Which picture would most likely be used as an example of human impact on Earth?A trail built by cutting down treesA river eroding away the riverbankA bird nest made of dead branchesA group of butterflies landing on flowers
Which plant part absorbs minerals?leafrootfruitflower
Which tool would be best to use to record the types of trees found along a riverbank?camerahand lensmicroscopethermometer
On the edge of many deserts, there is a delicate area with abundant vegetation. Sometimes cattle are allowed to graze in these areas. The hooves of the cattle compact the topsoil making it less absorbent. Which environmental concern is most likely to happen at the edge of the desert when cattle graze there?erosionnutrient depletionatmospheric heatinggroundwater contamination
How do toxic heavy metals move from soil to lakes and streams?runoffcondensationprecipitationtranspiration
What happens when the Sun's energy warms ocean water?The water collects.The water evaporates.The water condenses.The water precipitates.
Which object will conduct electricity, conduct heat, and be attracted to a magnet?iron nailwooden toothpickaluminum foilcotton ball
Energy from the Sun changes ocean water to a gas. This sentence describes which step in the water cycle?condensationevaporationprecipitationrunoff
Which is an example of symbiosis?a tick feeding on a deera lion hunting a zebraa dandelion growing in a grass lawna dolphin communicating with another dolphin
A student is investigating changes in the states of matter. The student fills a graduated cylinder with 50 milliliters of packed snow. The graduated cylinder has a mass of 50 grams when empty and 95 grams when filled with the snow. During which process in the water cycle does snow fall to the ground?classificationcondensationevaporationprecipitation
In a food chain, living organisms that eat plants and are a food source for other animals are calleddecomposers.carnivores.producers.herbivores.
Which of the following happens only during the adult stage of the life cycle of a frog?A frog lays eggs.A frog swims in water.A frog begins to lose its tail.A frog begins to develop lungs.
In order for nitrogen to be used for growth in organisms, it must be "fixed." When nitrogen is "fixed," it is combined into the form of ammonium or other nitrogen ions. During which type of fixation do organisms and nitrogen interact?biologicalcombustionindustriallightning
What is the relationship between mass and gravitational pull?Lower gravitational pull creates more mass.Higher gravitational pull creates more mass.Lower mass creates higher gravitational pull.Higher mass creates higher gravitational pull.
Which enzyme acts first in response to the ingestion of a hamburger patty?amylase in the mouthpepsin in the stomachlipase in the small intestinetrypsin in the small intestine
Which part of Earth's structure is composed of a solid mixture of nickel and iron?the inner corethe outer corethe lithospherethe asthenosphere
A disease that can be passed from one person to another is best described as beinghazardous.contaminated.infectious.toxic.
Scientists have observed an increase in global temperatures over the past 100 years. Which phenomena do scientists believe contributes to the increase in temperatures?an increase in undersea volcanic activitya decrease in the distance between Earth and the Sunan increase in certain gases released during the use of fossil fuelsa decrease in the amount of water on Earth due to overconsumption
Which weather condition commonly occurs along a cold front?clear skiesprecipitationwarm temperaturesdry air
The sound made by crickets occurs when the male crickets rubs its two hind legs together. Which type of energy transformation results in the sound made by crickets?sound energy to thermal energythermal energy to chemical energymechanical energy to sound energymechanical energy to chemical energy
Salt water, plastic, and helium are all made ofatoms.mixtures.electrons.compounds.
As a satellite falls toward Earth, the gravitational force between the satellite and Earth increases. Which statement best explains why there is an increase in gravitational force?As the satellite gets closer to Earth, the satellite cools.As the satellite approaches Earth, the satellite rotates faster.The mass of the satellite increases as it nears Earth.The distance between Earth and the satellite decreases.
A student walking quickly while carrying an orange on his lunch tray stops suddenly. The orange will most likely roll off the tray due toinertia of the orange.centripetal force of the orange.the friction acting on the orange.the balanced forces acting on the orange.
The transfer of a section of DNA from one organism into the DNA of another organism by scientists is calledselective breedinggenetic engineeringnatural selectioninternal fertilization
A student collects data about the dates and strengths of historical earthquakes in Nevada. Which of the following would be best for reporting the strengths of these earthquakes over time?a topographic mapa line grapha series of photographsa table of pictographs
The major organ systems in the human body interact in many ways. Which of the following statements describes one way that the skeletal system interacts with the circulatory system?The skull protects the brain from injury.Red blood cells carry oxygen to the bones.The skull supports the eyes in their sockets.Red blood cells carry oxygen to the muscles.
A snowball is made the exact size of a golf ball. Both the golf ball and the snowball are dropped from the same height onto a concrete sidewalk. The snowball breaks, but the golf ball bounces. Which of the following best describes a reason for the difference in reaction of the two balls?The snowball is colder than the golf ball.The snowball is less dense then the golf ball.The effects of friction are greater on the golf ball.The effects of Earth's gravity are greater on the snowball.
Which of these is the best way to dispose of a potentially dangerous compound?pour it down the drainput it into a garbage canrecycle the compound for a future lab activityplace it in a hazardous material waste container
Asbestos fibers cause a cancer called mesothelioma in humans. The fibers kill cells that line lung tissue by causing programmed-cell death. When cells die this way, they release a chemical, HMG1, which causes an inflammatory response in other cells. During this inflammatory response, cells release chemicals that promote tumor growth. What conclusion can you draw about the chemicals released in the inflammatory response?They decrease the amount of HMG1 in a feedback loop.They increase the amount of HMG1 in a feedback loop.They disrupt the normal circadian rhythms.They disrupt the normal cell cycle.
Sea lions often swim in the waters of the Pacific Ocean with their flippers sticking above the surface of the water. At other times they may be on land with only their flippers in the water. What would these behaviors most likely accomplish?attracting matesconfusing predatorspreventing dehydrationregulating body temperature
If a ball rolls at a constant rate on a flat surface, the motion is due togravitational forces.frictional forces.electromagnetic forces.balanced forces.
Many ways of generating electricity use water. An electrical plant using which energy source changes the temperature of water it uses least?nuclear powerhydroelectric powernatural gascoal
Environments have changed over millions of years. Which of these would be best for a scientist to study when investigating these environmental changes?volcanic depositsweather forecastsfossil recordsocean currents
Benjamin Franklin invented many different things. Among his inventions were bifocal glasses, the lightning rod, and a type of iron stove. Which personal quality most likely led to the invention of these things?humorhonestycuriosityleadership
Over a long period of time, helpful variations in a species replace the unfavorable ones. This change can lead tofossilization.evolution.geographic isolation.genetic mutations.
Earth's atmosphere is made of many gases. Which gas do producers use to make food?oxygencarbon dioxidenitrogenwater vapor
Which is an abiotic factor that most limits the number of frogs living in a pond?the color of the waterthe number of predatorsthe temperature of the waterthe populations of producers
To which of the following phenomena do humans contribute the least?plate tectonicssoil erosionair pollutiondeforestation
When pressure is released along a fault line, the energy produced spreads as mechanical waves in the form of an earthquake. The mechanical waves transferred to the air becomesound.electricity.light.heat.
James recorded a measurement of 3° Celsius. Which tool was James most likely using to measure temperature?rulerthermometergraduated cylindertriple-beam balance
Where in the cell does glycolysis occur?cytoplasmnucleusribosomechromatin
An architect builds a 1/10 scale model of a house to test the design for sources of heat loss in the winter. Which part of the model would be most important to test with heat-sensing equipment?floorsceilingswindowsstaircases
A black brick exposed to sunlight becomes warm. How is energy from the Sun transferred to the brick?convectionconductionradiationreflection
Which process transfers heat when particles collide in a solid?convectionconductionradiationevaporation
Electrical energy may sometimes be converted to mechanical energy. Which of these appliances converts electrical energy into mechanical energy?fanlampradiostove
A student wants to compare the masses and volumes of three marbles. Which two instruments should be used?Balance and graduated cylinderCentimeter ruler and thermometerGraduated cylinder and centimeter rulerThermometer and balance
Humans have a body system that helps to deliver nutrients and hormones, remove excess wastes, and exchange gases. Which body system is most responsible for these functions?excretorycirculatoryrespiratoryreproductive
At what temperature does a sample of water most rapidly become a gas?boiling pointfreezing pointtransition pointevaporation point
Beryl finds a rock and wants to know what kind it is. Which piece of information about the rock will best help her to identify it?The size of the rockThe weight of the rockThe temperature where the rock was foundThe minerals the rock contains
What activity must mRNA do in traveling from DNA to protein synthesis sites in eukaryotic cells that does not occur in prokaryotic cells?duplicate itselfbreak off some of its phosphates to release energycross a membranecoil into a compact crystal form
Bacteria that enter the body are destroyed by which type of cells?white blood cellsred blood cellskidney cellslung cells
The electromagnetic spectrum is the complete range of electromagnetic radiation ranging from radio waves to gamma rays. Which type of radiation in this spectrum is associated with observable colors such as red, green, and blue?gamma raysX-raysvisible lightradio waves
When a scientist performs an experiment, there are many changes that can occur. Which observation should she list as a chemical change?The substance was heated.The shape of the substance changed.The volume of the substance changed.The substance changed into a new substance.
Which type of relationship exists when a certain type of tree's roots need a fungus present in order to grow normally?beneficialcompetitiveharmfulinfectious
The movement of crustal plates results from circulating currents in material beneath the crust of Earth. Which best describes the material which moves the crustal plates?hot watermolten rockliquid metalsolid iron
Which of the following statements best describes how the four planets closest to the Sun are different from the next four planets in our solar system?The four closest planets are more dense.The four closest planets have more moons.The four closest planets have greater diameters.The four closest planets take longer to complete one orbit.
Muscle tissues are made of specialized units calledorgans.cells.genes.organelles.
Plants can reproduce sexually and asexually. If one offspring is produced sexually while the other is produced asexually, what will only the sexually produced offspring have?both inherited and acquired traitsa new combination of traitsbeneficial genetic traitsa complete set of traits
What tool best allows a geologist to study coastal erosion caused by recent hurricanes?satellite imagesradar maptopographic mapweather charts
The burning of fossil fuels affects the atmosphere byadding more heat and carbon dioxide.reducing the amount of necessary heat.taking water vapor out of the atmosphere.putting more oxygen in the atmosphere.
The condition of the air outdoors at a certain time of day is known asfrictionlightforceweather
The Halifax River has a major flood plain in Port Orange, Florida. Minerals are deposited into the soil of the flood plain when the water overflows the banks of the river. These minerals can reduce the absorption of the soil in the flood plain and affect the growth of plants in the area. Which best describes the role of the deposited minerals in the flood plain ecosystem?a trophic levela limiting factora territorial boundarya food-chain component
Sheila ran around a track four times. She felt the need to breathe harder and faster. What were her muscles requiring?more carbon dioxidemore nitrogenmore oxygenmore water
In an energy pyramid, the total energy available for consumption from one trophic level to the next one above it isreduced.conserved.multiplied.evenly distributed.
Which of the following traits of a dog is inherited from its parents?the presence of fleas in its furthe color of its furthe ability to sit up and begthe habit of barking to go outside
Students on a field trip discovered fossilized shark teeth on the side of a cliff. Which conclusion can best be made about the history of the area?It was once a hot desert.It was once a shallow sea.It was once part of a glacier.It was once part of a rain forest.
A student placed a small chip of limestone into a hydrochloric acid solution, and carbon dioxide gas was released. The carbon dioxide provided evidence thatonly a physical change occurred.a chemical change occurred.only a loss of mass occurred.the formation of an element occurred.
What is the body's first layer of defense against germs?liverstomachbrainskin
Which of these best describes a species?organisms that are similar in appearanceorganisms that adapt to similar environmentsorganisms that can breed and produce fertile offspringorganisms that live together in the same area
Scientists go to a lake once a month to take samples of water. They are most likely studying thenumber of fish.depth of the lake.quality of the water.speed of the water.
Which of the following groups of materials would most likely be used to build an electromagnet?bare wire, plastic rod, batterybare wire, iron rod, light bulbinsulated wire, iron rod, batteryinsulated wire, plastic rod, light bulb
The barred owl has been moving into the habitat of the spotted owl. This could lead to a reduction in the spotted owl population if thetwo owl species cannot interbreed.barred owl is a secondary consumer.barred owl is better adapted to habitat changes.spotted owl is dependent on local producers.
Twentieth-century research by such scientists as Jonas Salk on the use of vaccines has reduced the number of people who are infected withpolio.stroke.diabetes.tuberculosis.
What is the smallest unit of an element that retains the properties of that element?electronmoleculeneutronatom
A body structure under a skunk's tail produces a liquid with a very bad odor. This odor helps the skunk toavoid predatorsobtain foodmake a shelterregulate its body heat
Which of the following is an example of sex-linked inheritance?diabetescystic fibrosishemophiliaalbinism
Volcanic eruptions are caused primarily by the movement ofrock by erosionEarth in its orbitplanetary windstectonic plates
Which of these best explains why peer review is critical to the advancement of science?It provides an independent assessment of conclusions.It allows laboratories to practice science.It creates more job opportunities for scientists.It ensures all scientists will study similar phenomena.
A cell releases energy from storage molecules on the inner surface of the membrane that surrounds the cell. The location of these molecules best indicates that the cellis part of a multicellular organism.is prokaryotic.performs sexual reproduction.is eukaryotic.
One substance found on Earth is more stable as an elemental gas than as part of a solid compound. As a result, this substance is very abundant in the atmosphere. Which substance exhibits these traits?argonchlorinenitrogenoxygen
Which property of an object determines how well it conducts electricity?the color of the objectthe mass of the objecthow fast the object sinks in waterthe material that the object is made of
Which skill is a scientist using when sorting rocks into two groups based on physical appearance?inferringclassifyinggeneralizinghypothesizing
The major function of the kidneys is toexchange gases.break down nutrients.filter wastes and byproducts.carry blood back to the heart.
A streak plate can be used to determine thehardness of a mineral.structure of a mineral.cleavage of a mineral.luster of a mineral.
Which will increase the energy of motion of water molecules?add heatadd iceremove some of the waterplace the water in the freezer
How a material responds to heating and cooling tells us about the material'soptical properties.mechanical properties.thermal properties.acoustical properties.
A balanced chemical equation showsthe products of a reaction.elements created by a reaction.phase changes taking place during a reaction.the number of molecules involved in a reaction.
In which layer of Earth's atmosphere does weather occur?mesospherestratospherethermospheretroposphere
Which of these is MOST flexible?Broom handleWooden rulerDrinking strawSewing needle
Which of these is an abiotic element of a desert ecosystem?sandcactuslizardscorpion
Which statement best explains why ice cubes will melt in a glass of tea?The tea becomes saturated.The ice cubes gain energy.The tea's freezing point increases.The ice cube's melting point decreases.
Rabies can lead to an infection of the brain. This directly causes problems in theexcretory system.nervous system.skeletal system.integumentary system.
Which of these could only be found inside a plant cell?nucleuschloroplastsmitochondriacytoplasm
Which cellular organelle uses oxygen and glucose to provide energy to the cell?mitochondrionnucleusribosomevacuole
All living things are composed of cells. Which action is not accomplished by repeated cell division?a plant developing new leavesa broken bone growing back togethera plant using sunlight to make its own foodan eight-pound baby growing into a 100-pound teenager
At the end of the mitotic cell cycle, a cell divides into two cells. What must happen before the cell divides?The number of organelles doubles.Chromosomes must be copied.Four nuclei must be formed.The membrane thickens.
Which of the following best describes a scientific inference?the data collected during an experimentan explanation based on facts but is not the direct observationan opinion that is not based on logical thinking or material evidencethe results from experiments that can be reproduced through more experimentation
The oldest Moon rocks have been dated to a time shortly after the estimated date of the formation of our solar system. Approximately how old are these Moon rocks?6.4 billion years4.5 billion years2.8 billion years1.7 billion years
A rubber ball rolls across a level surface. The ball will eventually stop rolling due toelectricityconductivityfrictionmagnetism
Which resource is nonrenewable?petroleumsandwoodoxygen
Neutral atoms have an equal number ofelectrons and neutrons.protons and neutrons.protons and electrons.protons, neutrons, and electrons.
Which of the following observations best supports the conclusion that two animal species evolved from a common ancestor in recent geological history?The species are both herbivores.The species have similar bone structure.The species live in the same environment.The species both obtain oxygen from the air.
A body cell that is undergoing abnormal cell division is most likelyproducing sex cellstransporting nutrientsforming cancerous cellsdeveloping an infection
Which observation indicates that a chemical reaction has taken place?A substance becomes warmer.A material changes from a solid to liquid.Bubbles form when a liquid is heated.A new chemical substance is formed.
Beth and Juan made dough by combining sugar, butter, flour, and salt. Which term best describes the dough?a compoundan elementa mixturea solution
A family goes on vacation for a week. When they return home they discover that some vegetables in their refrigerator have gone bad. What is the most environmentally responsible thing for them to do with the rotten food?toss it into a fire pit and burn itthrow it in the trash to be taken to a landfillput it in a compost pile to use for plant foodtake it back to the grocery store and try to get their money back
A sample of the element copper is divided into the smallest particles possible such that each particle is still copper. Each particle can best be described asan atom.a molecule.a nucleus.an electron.
Which term best describes the movement of water through cell membranes?respirationosmosismitosiscondensation
Which generates waves that are capable of traveling through a vacuum?a light bulba speakerearthquake activityvolcanic eruption
Which tool would best separate sand and clay mixed in soil?sifterrulerthermometermagnet
A volcano found in the center of a tectonic plate tends to be a result of which phenomenon?strong earthquakeactivity at a hot spotpressure in thick sediments that produces heatunusually excessive erosion that wears away bedrock
A single human body cell typically contains thousands ofgenesnucleichloroplastsbacteria
Individuals that carry a particular allele may have more descendants than other individuals, resulting in the allele becoming more common. Which process causes random alleles to become more common within a population?gene shufflingdirectional selectionnatural selectiongenetic drift
Which statement about the electromagnetic spectrum is accurate?Gamma waves travel faster than radio waves.Ultraviolet waves make up most of the spectrum.X-rays travel slower than infrared waves.Visible light waves are a small part of the spectrum.
Which gas could cause rust to form on a metal can?HydrogenOxygenNitrogenHelium
What causes a change in the speed of a moving object?forcetemperaturechange in masschange in location
Which process releases energy from digested food?photosynthesiscellular respirationvitamin productionfertilization
Melinda learned that days in some seasons have more daylight hours than in other seasons. Which season receives the most hours of sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere?fallspringsummerwinter
In which of the following taxonomic groups would organisms have the least number of similarities?kingdomclassfamilygenus
Wolves have adapted skills for hunting large hoofed animals such as elk, deer, or moose. Wolves tend to target prey animals that are sick or weak. The wolf benefits from this strategy because it uses less energy to hunt. How would the prey animal population also benefit from this strategy?by promoting detrimental genesby stimulating beneficial DNA mutationsby preventing the introduction of other predator speciesby increasing the reproductive success of healthy prey animals
Which is an example of metamorphosis?A caterpillar changes into a butterfly.An earthworm tunnels through the soil.A lizard lays eggs in the sand.A giraffe eats leaves from a tree.
Bracket fungi grow and feed on the dead wood inside of trees. What is the role of bracket fungi in an ecosystem?secondary consumersprimary consumersdecomposersproducers
A bicycle is considered a complex machine because it isused to perform a task.made from natural materials.made up of more than one simple machine.complicated to build and repair.
In the 1600s Sir Isaac Newton discovered that sunlight is made up of all the colors of the rainbow. What tool did Sir Isaac Newton most likely use to make his discovery?A lensA mirrorA prismA telescope
A plant sitting on a windowsill has wilted. A student explained that the plant wilted because it is in direct sunlight. What is another possible reason the plant wilted?The noise in the room was too loud.There was too much space for the plant to grow.The plant did not receive enough water.There was too much carbon dioxide in the room.
The bacteria Escherichia coli (E. coli) live in the intestines of humans and make vitamins such as vitamin K and B-complex vitamins. Which would best describe the relationship between E. coli and humans?The E. coli benefit and humans are harmed.There is only a benefit for the humans.There is only a benefit for the E. coli.The E. coli and humans both benefit.
Most sand is made of quartz and has a white or brownish color. A student walking on a beach in Hawaii notices the sand is black in color. This sand most likely came from which type of rock?limestonegranitebasaltgypsum
Human DNA includes a class of genes called "tumor suppressors." What do these genes do in bone cells?They restrict cell cycle progression in bone cells.They promote the rapid development of bone cells.They limit the number of bones in the human body.They enable phosphorus and calcium to enter bone cells.
Which is a good practice to help conserve energy?washing all clothes in warm waterturning off the lights when not in useletting the water run when brushing teethusing bags made of plastic instead of paper
If a single-celled organism that uses photosynthesis has its source of light removed, it willgrow in size.produce less energy.divide repeatedly.generate more waste.
One morning, Jane notices drops of water on the outside of a window. Later in the day, she notices that the drops have disappeared. What most likely caused the drops to disappear?The water condensed on the plants around the house.Energy from the sun caused the water to evaporate.The water cooled enough to turn into water vapor.Wind blowing on the window turned the water into vapor.
Which plant cell structures capture sunlight to produce sugars?vacuolesribosomesmitochondriachloroplasts
What is the term for the amount of heat per unit mass required to raise the temperature of a material by one degree Celsius?energymattertemperaturespecific heat capacity
Above a continent, a warm air mass slowly passes over a cold air mass. As the warm air begins to cool, clouds form. What will most likely happen next?Rain will fall.Hurricanes will form.Lightning will strike.Hail will form.
In a zoo located in a warm region, which should be included in the polar bear exhibit?food bowl with fruithot, bright lightscold-water pooltall palm trees
Which of the following is not passed from parents to children?hair color and frecklesa scar on the kneethe need to breathe airthe ability to roll the tongue
Which scientist was the first to devise the rules of chemical reactions that are explained by modern atomic theory?John DaltonIsaac NewtonGalileo GalileiAlbert Einstein
The Arctic hare's brown fur turns white in winter. This adaptation helps the Arctic harelook for food after dark.hide from enemies in snow.live in cold temperatures.get along with other animals.
Which of the following describes condensation?a liquid changing to a solida solid changing to a liquida solid changing to a gasa gas changing to a liquid
Diamonds are sometimes used as the tips of drill bits. Which physical property of a diamond MOST likely makes it a good cutting tool?its electrical propertiesits thermal propertiesits hardnessits density
A student observes a substance that is highly reflective and able to conduct electricity. The substance also has a high melting point. Which is the most likely classification for this substance?saltglassmetalplastic
The basic units of structure and function for both plants and animals arecells.organs.systems.tissues.
Kelly slides a flat rock across the smooth ice of a frozen pond. The rock slows down after several seconds. What causes the rock to slow down?The thickness of the iceThe temperature of the air above the iceThe force of friction between the ice and the rockThe gravitational force between the ice and the rock
A scientist designs a mathematical model of the rock cycle. The model predicts how changes in Earth processes will affect the amounts of different types of rock on Earth. Which quantity should stay the same as Earth processes change?the average rate at which Earth rotatesthe average distance of Earth from the Sunthe total number of inactive volcanoes on Earththe total amount of material on Earth
Which process results in the formation of a new cell with a full set of chromosomes?respirationdigestionfertilizationevolution
When rocks are exposed to wind, rain, heat, ice, or waves, the rocksfold.erode.contract.melt.
What part of the body receives information from the senses?heartbrainlungsstomach
During a walk through the Arkansas River Valley, Alex found a rock that she determined was a sedimentary rock. Which characteristics of the rock would lead Alex to this conclusion?thin flaky sheets and very hardglassy texture and a shiny black colorvery rough texture with obvious crystalssand-sized particles and a light brown color
Which of these tools is used to measure the melting point of ice?hot platebarometerthermometermeter stick
Between the ages of 8 and 13, young boys' and girls' bodies begin to change. This is the beginning point of children becoming adults. During these years, the endocrine system releases certain types of hormones. What is most likely being regulated by this system?absorption of water and nutrientsgrowth and development of the bodyblood flow to the cells and major organsrate that waste is eliminated from the body
Most of the mass of the atom consists ofprotons only.electrons only.protons and neutrons.neutrons and electrons.
An increase in tourism and agriculture in the Florida Everglades most likely had which effect?an increase in water pollutiona decrease in industrializationan increase in total biomassa decrease in nonnative plants
In which part of a tree does photosynthesis most likely take place?barkrootstrunkleaves
When two nitrogen atoms combine, they form amixture.compound.molecule.liquid.
When forest trees are cleared from the land, and trees are not replanted, which of the following will most likely occur?soil erosionsedimentationlightning firesincrease in habitat
Barney is a cat. Which trait was made by his environment?Barney has a long tail.Barney has brown eyes.Barney has a pink tongue.Barney has a scar on his ear.
Weathering causes rocks and minerals to break into smaller pieces. Which event is the best example of weathering?a raindrop splashing in a lakea snowball rolling down a mountaina river washing away soil from its banka tree root growing into the crack of a rock
Students were investigating the relationship between the length and period of a pendulum. They made a pendulum by using string to suspend a 0.5-kg mass from a fixed support. The students changed the length of the string and measured the time it took for the pendulum to complete ten cycles of motion. By dividing each time measurement by ten, they were able to calculate the period of the pendulum. What was the independent variable?the length of the pendulumthe period of the pendulumthe type of string used in making the pendulumthe amount of mass used in making the pendulum
Which most accurately describes all behavior?All behavior is affected only by experience.All behavior is affected only by inheritance.All behavior is affected neither by experience nor inheritance.All behavior is affected by both experience and inheritance.
The formation of an ionic bond involves thetransfer of electrons.sharing of neutrons.transfer of neutrons.sharing of protons.
Which of the following is the best example of potential energy?a fallen rocka burning matcha liter of gasolinea red-hot piece of iron
Astronomers measure distances using very large units called light years. Which distance between celestial objects would most likely be measured in light years?distance between the Sun and Earthdistance between the Moon and Earthdistance between two stars in the same galaxydistance between two planets in the same solar system
Which characteristic of a plant would best help it survive in a very dry climate?colorful flowers to attract insectsstrong stems to stay uprightwaxy leaves to keep in watergreen color to photosynthesize
Which of the following laboratory practices should be avoided?pouring water into an acidpouring a base into waterpouring water into alcoholpouring alcohol into a base
Which is the best reason for planting a tree away from a sidewalk?The tree would get sunlight.The tree would provide shelter for birds.The sidewalk might crack as the tree grows.The temperature of the sidewalk would drop.
The life cycle of some plants includes the process of pollination. Pollination is helped bywind, water, and insects.sun, water, and roots.humans, sun, and stems.roots, wind, and stems.
A wire is wrapped around a metal nail and connected to a battery. If the battery is active, the nail willvibrate.create sound.produce heat.become magnetic.
The numbat, a small Australian marsupial, requires fallen logs and dead trees for shelter and for its primary food, termites. Loss of old-growth forests containing logs and dead trees could threaten the numbat with extinction. What would be the best method to protect the numbat from extinction?provide feeding stations with termites for the numbatsprotect areas of old-growth forest from clear-cuttingprohibit hiking in forests where numbats livemove the numbat to a different habitat
When a predator feeding on certain prey is removed from the environment, which variable will most likely determine whether or not the prey will survive?temperatureavailable foodrelative humiditycompetition with other species
If you bounce a rubber ball on the floor, it goes up and then comes down. What causes the ball to come down?magnetismgravityelectricityfriction
Persians are one of several breeds of domestic cat, Felis catus. Which attribute can be used to classify organisms as Felis catus?form of locomotionmethod and frequency of reproductionenvironment in which they are foundgenetic and structural characteristics
Most South American monkeys have color vision. But the members of one genus, Aotus , also known as "owl monkeys," do not have color vision. Scientists think that the genus evolved from monkeys that did have color vision. The ability to see color was lost when it was no longer helpful. Which other trait of the genus would contribute most to making color vision unimportant?The monkeys live in the trees of dense forests.The monkeys make eight different sounds.The monkeys are active only at night.The monkeys choose mates for life.
Which organelle in a plant cell captures sunlight and converts the energy into food?nucleuschloroplastcell membranecell wall
The force necessary to keep planets in orbit around the Sun isgravity.friction.magnetism.nuclear.
Which of these geologic features results from tectonic plates slowly moving over a hot spot?plateausislandscanyonsdeltas
The weather forecast indicates that a warm front will be moving into the area in the next 24 hours. Which type of weather will most likely result?clear skies and cold temperaturesclear skies and hot temperaturescloudy skies and rainy weatherheavy snow and ice
Flexibility is a physical property of some matter. Which of these materials best demonstrates the property of flexibility?a mirrora pencila metal wirea telephone pole
Which of these structures is produced in an ovary?fetusspermeggembryo
What is the function of skin on the human body?Skin has pores that help the body sense odor.Skin protects the body from harmful substances.Skin brings oxygen directly into the body's bloodstream.
Students run laps around the track in physical education class. After a few laps, the students' breathing gets heavier, and their pace begins to slow. The students are most likely slowing down becausethey are exhaling carbon dioxide.their lung cells are multiplying.their respiratory system stops functioning.they are getting less oxygen to their cells.
The Periodic Table is arranged in rows and columns. From left to right along a row, the atomic number in each columndecreases by 2.increases by 1.decreases for gases.increases for metals.
Which of these gases, on average, has the lowest volume in the atmosphere of Earth?oxygennitrogenwater vaporcarbon dioxide
The most significant human-induced impact on Earth's atmosphere comes from the use of which energy resource?flowing waterfossil fuelssunlightwinds
The building of houses in Maryland uses many different materials. Which building material is made of a renewable natural resource?copper wiresteel beamswood boardsplastic siding
Which tool would best help a student closely observe the smallest living thing in a drop of pond water?telescopebinocularshand lensmicroscope
Planting certain crop plants in a field causes a disruption of the natural nitrogen cycle in that field. Which outcome would this disruption most DIRECTLY cause in the field over time?topsoil erodessoil nutrients decreasedesert conditions appearatmospheric carbon dioxide increases
Sally noticed that there was a decline in the number of eggs her hens were laying. She decided to investigate if the decline might be caused by the amount of food she was feeding the hens. Which would be the dependent (responding) variable in Sally's investigation?number of eggs laidsize of the cageamount of foodage of hens
Which measurement is best expressed in light-years?the rate at which the universe is expandingthe distance between stars in the Milky Waythe time it takes for planets to complete their orbitsthe speed at which light travels through the universe
In which way are sugars usually transported throughout a pine tree?across from the cones to the needlesdown from the needles to the rootsup from the roots to the branchescircular from the top to the bottom of the trunk
Water that has its salt removed before it can be used as drinking water is most likely to have come fromundergrounda rivera lakea sea
Charged particles formed during a chemical reaction are calledions.protons.molecules.neutrons.
A grocery company found a way to keep fresh foods from spoiling when transporting them long distances. How might this new technology help people in Hawaii?by increasing the types of food available in storesby decreasing the amount of food sold in storesby increasing the time it takes to shop in storesby decreasing the number of stores
A student notices a paw print while walking in a park. The paw print could be considered a fossil if the print was in ___.rocktopsoilthick mudloose sand
Which of the following runs ONLY on electricity?a sailboata motorcyclea ceiling fana steam engine
The muscles exert forces on the body and enable movement bypushing on tendons.squeezing ligaments.stimulating the spinal cord.pulling on bones.
A cold can of juice is removed from the refrigerator and is placed outdoors on a warm day. After several minutes, moisture appears on the outside of the cold can. Which of the following statements best explains why the moisture appears?The warm air absorbs cold from the can and changes to a liquid.Water vapor in the air condenses into a liquid on the cold can.The warm air causes heat to flow out of the can and condense in the air.Water vapor in the air absorbs heat from the can and changes to a liquid.
Actin filaments are part of the contractile machinery in smooth muscle cells of eukaryotic organisms. Which organelle is responsible for contractile movement in these cells?nucleuscytoskeletonendoplasmic reticulumplasma membrane
A weather balloon is about 2 meters wide when it is near the ground. It grows to about 6 meters wide at higher altitudes. Which change most likely makes the balloon become wider at higher altitudes?More gases enter the balloon.The gas inside the balloon gets much hotter.The air pressure surrounding the balloon decreases.Sunlight breaks down the material of the balloon.
When blood that is high in carbon dioxide exits the heart, it immediately enters which body system?nervousrespiratorydigestivemuscular
One method used to speed up the rate of a chemical reaction is toadd a catalystadd an inhibitordecrease the temperaturedecrease reactant concentration
In an electric motor, electrical energy is converted intomechanical energy.chemical energy.thermal energy.light energy.
Diamonds are formed when carbon is placed under extreme heat and pressure. This process occursin caves.in the ocean.in the atmosphere of Earth.beneath the surface of Earth.
Sonar helps people find which information about an object?ColorWeightLocationTemperature
Which description is an example of camouflage?plant leaves closing up when touchedbutterflies migrating south for the wintergreen insects sitting on green leavesearthworms moving through soil
Which object is a planet found in the Milky Way Galaxy?OrionEarthPolarisTitan
There are many different types of living cells on Earth. Which of these characteristics do all living cells have in common?require water for survivalrequire silicon for structural supportrequire oxygen for respirationrequire sunlight for photosynthesis
Some scientists have suggested that the Moon was formed when a large body struck Earth and broke off a piece of Earth billions of years ago. Which observation would best support this suggestion?The rocks of the Moon are older than Earth rocks.The Earth has free standing water, but the Moon does not.The Earth and the Moon are gravitationally locked together.The chemical composition of Moon rocks is similar to Earth rocks.
The Milky Way Galaxy looks like a band of light across the sky. Which observation would provide the best view of this band of light without a telescope?observing only near the north or south poleobserving only during a lunar or solar eclipseobserving on any sunny, clear dayobserving on any dark, clear night
The use of the Internet has changed life for many people by directly allowing them tobuild bigger houses.communicate faster.drive larger cars.eat junk food.
Which best describes the Sun?very small white dwarfmedium yellow dwarflarge blue giantred supergiant
The relationships among elements were used to organize the elements systematically long before the behavior of electrons was understood. Which scientist is credited with this organization of elements?DemocritusJohn DaltonRobert MillikanDmitri Mendeleev
Planets in our solar system have different solar years. Which statement explains the cause of an Earth solar year?Earth rotates around the sun.Earth revolves around the sun.The sun rotates around Earth.The sun revolves around Earth.
At 10 A.M. the Sun is shining on a puddle of water on the road. At 2 P.M. the Sun is still shining and the puddle has disappeared. What happened to the water?It rained.It condensed.It evaporated.It froze.
A plant growing on a hillside has a stem that curves so that the plant is vertical. This curve is not observed in plants of the same species growing on level ground. Which statement best explains the curved stem of the plant growing on the hillside?It is a trait for which the plant has no genes.It is a trait that is usually detrimental to plant survival.It is a trait that developed in response to temperature variations.It is a trait that is only expressed under particular environmental conditions.
Just under half the oil that enters ocean water comes from natural oil seeps on the ocean floor. Just over half the oil in the oceans comes from human activities. Which human activity contributes the most oil to the oceans?transporting oil over the ocean surfacedrilling for oil on the ocean floorpolluting land with oil that reaches the oceans in runoffpolluting air with oil that reaches the ocean in precipitation
A teacher carefully places some objects into very hot water. After one minute, which item is most likely too hot to touch?a cloth napkina metal spoona plastic pencila wooden stick
Ocean currents, prevailing wind patterns, and other atmospheric disturbances are initially caused by which of these?differences in the cycles of the Moongravitational pull of the Sunincoming solar radiationozone layer depletion
Clouds and fog are made up ofwater.heat.light.helium.
What is the main function of chlorophyll in plants?To absorb light energyTo break down carbon dioxideTo make plants' leaves poisonous to insectsTo protect plants from disease
Which is a step in the process of photosynthesis?plants taking in carbon dioxidewater changing from a gas to a liquidoxygen converting to cellular energybacteria removing nitrogen from the atmosphere
Some scientists have suggested that pandas may be more closely related to raccoons than to bears. What could scientists compare between pandas and the raccoons to help classify the panda more accurately?their dietstheir DNAtheir body sizestheir geographic distribution
Why do astronauts need oxygen in the backpacks of their spacesuits?to help astronauts breathe in outer spaceto help with the weight of astronauts during space walksto manage carbon dioxide that astronauts breathe outto mix with the thin atmosphere for astronauts during space walks
Most hormones are produced by which human organ system?digestiveendocrinerespiratorynervous
A student plans to conduct an experiment to see how quickly mice learn to navigate a maze to reach a reward at the other end. Which of these will help lead to the most accurate conclusion?make the maze biggerprovide different food rewardsuse a reward other than fooduse the same maze and reward each day
In areas where limestone is present underneath the soil, continued rains can alter the limestone formation. The limestone can change to a highly porous formation that can lead to the formation of caves and sinkholes. Which process is directly responsible for changing the limestone?compactionerosionfaultingweathering
All of the following can become fossils exceptbones.shells.teeth.rocks.
Which source of information will most likely provide a student with the most accurate information about the landforms, natural resources, climate, and precipitation of Nevada?the meteorologist from a local television stationan Internet article written by university studentsthe Current Events section from a daily newspaperan Internet website developed by the U.S. Geological Survey
Ocean tides result mainly fromsurface winds.radiant heat from stars.Earth's tilt on its axis.the Moon's gravitational pull.
A basketball bounces on the gym floor nine times and finally comes to a rest. Which of these best explains why the basketball rises to a lower height each time it bounces?Gravity increases as the basketball bounces.The floor adds energy to the bouncing basketball.Energy is transferred from the basketball to the floor.The air inside the basketball is heavier than the surrounding air.
How does the latitude of a region affect its climate?by increasing the length of days throughout the yearby increasing the amount of energy the land can absorbby determining the angle of sunlight throughout the yearby determining the rate that tectonic plates can move
When notebook paper is folded to make an airplane, what physical property of the paper changes?MassWeightShapeSmell
Don throws a ball in the air. The ball comes back to the ground becausethe wind pushes on the ball with friction.the mass of Earth creates a pull of gravity on the ball.the core of Earth pulls on the ball with a magnetic attraction.the weight of the atmosphere pushes down on the ball.
Which external stimulus causes a plant to bend toward it?a light sourcea magnetic fielda spray of watera source of wind
The large-scale development of personal automobiles started in the early 1900s. Which of the following was a major cost associated with the efficient use of these automobiles?Road systems had to be expanded.Cities had to be built farther apart.Houses inside cities had to be built farther apart.Vehicle choices available to consumers had to be expanded.
A prairie dog living in a community barks loudly. Other prairie dogs nearby know that danger is near and quickly go underground to hide. Which sense are these prairie dogs using to communicate?hearingsmellingtastingtouching
One example of matter ismagnetismheatwaterradiation
Which object refracts light rays?wooden doorcardboard boxaluminum canglass window
What will happen to a cell that is placed in a hypotonic saline solution?Water will exit the cell causing it to shrink.Water will enter the cell causing it to swell.Salt will exit the cell causing it to shrink.Salt will enter the cell causing it to swell.
A butterfly lays an egg. The egg hatches into a larva. The larva becomes a pupa and then changes into a butterfly. This process is calledan adaptationa habitata food chaina life cycle
The small stone plant has leaves that look like pebbles or stones. This characteristic helps the plantattract insects for pollination.produce a large number of seeds.absorb water and nutrients.avoid being eaten by animals.
Which of these is an example of a non-contact force acting on an object?a bat hitting a baseballa paper clip attracted to a magneta refrigerator pushed across the floora bicycle tire rubbing against the road
What happens to the chemical energy in methane's bonds when methane reacts with oxygen and forms H_{2}O and CO_{2}?It is released as heat.It generates a current.It increases product mass.It is transformed into neutrons.
What is a common use of the mineral graphite?to make glassas a source of ironto make pencil leadsas a household cleaner
Seafloor spreading provides evidence of which of the following Earth processes?erosion of coastlinesweathering of mountainsmovement of crustal platesformation of sedimentary rocks
An object is moving in a straight line at a constant speed. What will happen to the object if no outside force acts on the object?The speed and direction of the object will change.The speed and direction of the object will not change.The direction of the object will change; the speed will remain constant.The speed of the object will change; the direction will remain constant.
Mr. Harris mows his lawn twice each month. He claims that it is better to leave the clippings on the ground. Which long term effect will this most likely have on his lawn?It will eventually cause the grass to stop growing.It will prevent bacteria from invading the lawn.It will provide the lawn with needed nutrients.It will reduce the insect population.
Some researchers predicted that mice could learn their way around a maze quickly if given a food reward. After many trials, the results came back but differed from the hypothesis. How should the researchers proceed?Show some results that agree with the hypothesis.Report the results accurately and then form a new hypothesis.Conduct more trials until the hypothesis is proven.Rewrite the hypothesis to better match the results.
There are many different processes that take place in plant and animal cells. Cellular respiration is one of those processes. What is the purpose of cellular respiration?To make and store foodTo add oxygen to the atmosphereTo release energy from stored foodTo remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
Christina kicks a ball. The ball moves faster when she kicks it on the concrete sidewalk than when she kicks it on the grass. Why does the ball travel slower on the grass than the sidewalk?The grass has more friction.The grass attracts more wind.The grass has a higher temperature.The grass increases Earth's gravity.
Immediately before and after running a 50 metre race, your pulse and breathing rates are taken. What changes would you expect to find?no change in pulse but a decrease in breathing ratean increase in pulse but no change in breathing ratean increase in pulse and breathing ratea decrease in pulse and breathing rateno change in either
Which steps in the water cycle most directly cause floods?precipitation and runoffcondensation and evaporationrunoff and condensationevaporation and precipitation
An engineer tests three new ceramic parts, each of which could potentially replace a steel part inside an automotive engine. The three parts, identical in size, are each made of a different ceramic compound. The parts are heated to the same temperature and placed under the same stress loads. At the end of the test, the engineer concludes Part B is the best for the job. What was the independent variable in this test?dimensions of the partstemperatures to which the parts were heatedthe engine used to test the partsthe composition of the parts
Specialized cells protect the human body from disease-causing microbes byproducing chemicals that destroy the microbesdissolving wastes from the microbescreating recessive genes in the microbessupplying oxygen and nutrients to the microbes
The frost line of the solar system divides the terrestrial plants from the gas-giant planets. What elements make up most of the core of the planets orbiting outside of the frost line?iron and nickelcarbon and oxygennitrogen and sulfurhydrogen and helium
How do warm ocean currents move to cooler ocean regions of Earth?by conductionby convectionby evaporationby radiation
In order to build a wooden table, which of the following is the best thing to do first?Stain the wood.Measure the boards.Saw the wood for the table.Make a drawing of the table.
Which object most likely has magnetic properties?iron nailplastic cliprubber eraserwooden spoon
A student is conducting an investigation on static electricity. The student has three balloons and rubs two of them on a piece of wool. The student then touches each balloon to a wall to observe if static electricity would cause the balloon to stick. What is the independent variable in this investigation?the height of the wallthe number of balloonsthe attraction to the wallthe rubbing action on the wool
The order of the elements in the periodic table is determined by theirabundance in nature.number of protons.number of isotopes.atomic mass.
An increase in greenhouse gases, which are believed to cause global warming, is due to a change in which occurrence?water cycleocean tidescarbon cycleweather patterns
A laser beam is aimed at four different objects. Through which of these objects will the laser beam pass and be refracted?a black clotha piece of aluminuma sheet of papera glass prism
Scientists track an icy object with an orbit that ranges from the Kuiper Belt to a path between Earth and the Sun. How would this object best be classified?an asteroida cometa meteora star
A student is given a sample of an unknown liquid to test in the laboratory. The student thinks that the liquid is water. Which of the following physical properties of the sample is most helpful to determine if the liquid is water?color of the liquidmass of the liquidvolume of the liquidboiling point of the liquid
After a period of steady increase, the rate of coal consumption was 50% higher during 2009 than it was during the year 2000. If this trend continues, which impact will coal consumption most likely have on the environment after the year 2010?decreased rates of deforestationdecreased atmospheric temperaturesincreased amounts of radioactive wasteincreased levels of greenhouse gas emissions
Which invention uses natural magnetism?satellitetelescopecompassbinoculars
Two workers are using a scaffold. One worker weighs 180 lbs. and the other weighs 200 lbs. Impact effects are assumed to increase the live load of the workers' weight by 25 percent. What is the resultant maximum live load, in pounds, that can be expected from the two workers supported by the scaffold?380 lbs.475 lbs.625 lbs.950 lbs.
Some sinkholes and caves are created when water dissolves certain rocks and minerals below ground. Which two parts of the water cycle are most directly responsible for the formation of sinkholes and caves?evaporation and infiltrationevaporation and transpirationprecipitation and infiltrationprecipitation and transpiration
A longitudinal wave, such as a sound wave, can travel throughsolids only.liquids only.gas, liquids, and solids.gas and a vacuum only.
A student removed a wool hat from her head. Her hair stood up from static electricity. What did her hat do to cause this?gave her hair a neutral chargeremoved protons from her hairgave her hair a negative chargeremoved electrons from her hair
Which process below is an example of an endothermic process?ice meltingwater freezingfood digestingsugar burning
A sodium (Na) atom contains 11 protons, 12 neutrons, and 11 electrons. In order to make the sodium ion Na+, what must occur to the sodium atom?It must gain one electron.It must lose one electron.It must gain one proton.It must lose one proton.
Which of these statements best describes the rock cycle?Layers of rock are broken by faults.Rocks in the ocean become rocks on land.Lunar rocks change into terrestrial rocks.New rocks form from older rocks.
The disruption of which cell function leads to gene mutations that result in cancer?protein synthesisRNA transcriptionRNA translationDNA replication
In photosynthesis, plants use chlorophyll to producesugar.water.energy.carbon dioxide.
One difference between the Moon and Earth is that the Moonhas a thick atmosphere.revolves around a planet.has liquid water on the surface.is composed entirely of sedimentary rock.
In an atom, the electrons can be foundorbiting the nucleus.inside the nucleus.bonded to the protons.bonded to the neutrons.
What event is most likely responsible for a rapid change at the surface of Earth?an earthquakea cold fronta continental glaciera thunderstorm
Biotic nitrogen fixation is performed by certainlichens.viruses.bacteria.mammals.
After rubbing a rubber brush on wool, Gilbert is able to use the brush to pick up small strips of paper. What causes the paper to be attracted to the brush?gravityelectric currentstatic electricitymagnetism
The influence of the Moon on the tides on Earth is greater than that of the Sun. Which best explains this?The Moon is more similar in composition to Earth than the Sun.The Moon has a smaller mass than Earth and the Sun.The Moon has a higher density than the Sun.The Moon is closer to Earth than the Sun.
If a student wants to measure the efficiency of an incandescent light bulb in a laboratory, which instrument would most likely be used to determine heat loss?photocellbarometerthermometerdecibel meter
What is the most likely reason the giant sloth became extinct in North America and Cuba?diseaseloss of habitatclimate changehumans as predators
When compared to the Sun, red dwarf stars areolder.cooler.lower density.larger diameter.
What energy change takes place when a piece of bread is toasted in a toaster?chemical energy to light energyelectrical energy to heat energyheat energy to chemical energylight energy to electrical energy
In what way can forest fires affect the lithosphere?increasing soil erosioncausing air pollutionincreasing seismic activitycausing violent dust storms
Which body system is responsible for breaking down food into molecules that it absorbs?digestivecirculatoryrespiratorylymphatic
Which object is best used to demonstrate the bending of light as it passes through a substance?convex lensflat mirroropaque rodconcave mirror
When an earthquake occurs, the speed of the seismic waves changes as theymove through different materials.are pulled by the force of gravity.lose energy to surrounding rocks.reflect off of boundaries.
What force is needed to help stop a child from slipping on ice?gravityfrictionelectricmagnetic
Many animals are still being hunted for their fur. Because of this, many of these animals are in danger ofstarvation.extinction.forest fires.overpopulation.
Solar energy is referred to as the energy of the future becausethe atmosphere receives many kinds of rays from the Sun.sunlight offers an unlimited amount of energy for the world.the thinning of the ozone layer is damaging the atmosphere.sunlight will not always be available and should be used now.
Which processes occur in all species of animals?breathing and migratingbreathing and reproducingeliminating waste and hibernatingeliminating waste and shedding fur
What evidence is there that the gravitational pull of the Moon has a direct effect on Earth?climate variationschange of seasonsnumber of earthquakeschanges in tidal ranges
Which structure best protects a cactus from being eaten by animals?waxy coating on the stemgreen pigment in the cellssharp spines as the leaveslong roots near the surface
What is the primary function of macrophages?absorb oxygen and transfer it to body cellsconsume pathogens and assist the immune systemaccumulate at an injury and initiate the clotting processcontain metabolites and maintain a balance of fluids
In the heart there is a group of specialized cells that regulates the frequency of the heartbeat. During strenuous exercise, the group of cells will most likelycause the arteries to expand.decrease the heart rate.increase the heart rate.send fewer signals.
Which human body systems are most directly involved when a person is walking?muscular and nervousexcretory and respiratorycirculatory and endocrinedigestive and reproductive
Calcium carbonate (CaCO_{3}) is considered a compound because it is made up of two or moremolecules.elements.gases.solids.
Modern factories and industrial plants have filters that remove much of the sulfur from their emissions before it reaches the atmosphere. This design feature helps most in reducing the contribution of factories to which environmental problem?acid rainhabitat losscoastline erosionalgal growth in lakes
Which condition is most likely to cause the formation of a temperature inversion?rapid cooling of the ground at nighthigh wind on a sunny morningsaturation of soil with warm rainrapid collision of warm and cold fronts
A young boy and his brothers have green eyes. This trait is best described aslearned.dietary.inherited.environmental.
Which term best describes body system defects that offspring may express when born?congenitalenvironmentalacquiredinfectious
Which type of precipitation consists of frozen rain drops?sleethailsnowfog
A nuclear reaction, such as those which occur in a nuclear power plant, can be classified as what type of reaction?solarchemicalexothermicendothermic
The force of gravitational attraction between Earth and any object on Earth is measured asmass.weight.volume.density.
Which example shows a chemical change to food during digestion?teeth chewing foodenzymes breaking down foodfood moving through the intestinesfood churning in the stomach
The air in front of a meteor is compressed as it passes through the atmosphere of Earth. This causes the meteor togain mass.gain velocity.increase in temperature.increase in surface area.
Martina only washes her sweater after she has worn it several times. Martina is helping the environment by ___.wasting waterreusing waterrecycling waterconserving water
Fruit flies reproduce by sexual reproduction. What percent of genes does a fertilized egg of a fruit fly receive from one parent?25%50%75%100%
The forelimb of the monkey, bat, penguin, and alligator look very different on the outside, but their skeletal structures are similar. This evidence suggests that these animalsmay have evolved from a common ancestor.all reproduce in a similar fashion.live in similar environments.should all be able to fly someday.
What allows two students standing ten feet apart to hear each other talk?air vibrationselectric currentsolar radiationsubatomic particles
What should a student do if he gets a red, itchy rash after a class field trip?scratch itwait for it to go awaytell the teacher right awaytell his best friend after school
The presence of an animal fossil in a rock gives evidence ofwhat hunting behaviors the animal usedhow many babies the animal hadexactly when the animal was bornthe time period the animal lived in
Which action does a kitten learn from its mother?how to growhow to meowhow to hunt micehow to nurse milk
Support cables in a suspension bridge are most stressed by which of the following forces?sheartorsiontensioncompression
What is a main feature of plains?a flat, level surfacea high, steep peaka low, shallow basina gentle, gradual slope
Decomposers are important in the food chain because theyproduce their own food using light from the Sun.stop the flow of energy from one organism to another.break down dead organisms and recycle nutrients into the soil.are microscopic and other organisms cannot consume them.
Bridge inspectors have determined that a bridge is unsafe. Which of the following is the BEST design process the company should use to correct the problem?identify the problem-repair the bridge-plan for the repairplan for the repair-repair the bridge-identify the problemplan for the repair-identify the problem-repair the bridgeidentify the problem-plan for the repair-repair the bridge
Which planet has characteristics that make it the most likely planet for the discovery of extra-terrestrial life?JupiterVenusSaturnMars
Organisms can be classified according to the flow of energy in a food chain. Which is the correct order of the flow of energy?Carnivore -> Producer -> HerbivoreProducer -> Herbivore -> CarnivoreHerbivore -> Producer -> CarnivoreProducer -> Carnivore -> Herbivore
Which of the following can make objects repel each other?gravitymagnetismboth gravity and magnetismneither gravity nor magnetism
Of the choices listed, what is the best way to conserve water in a home?take long showersrun a half full dishwasherlet the water run while washing the dishesturn off the water while brushing your teeth
Martin grew some bean plants. He made a list of what the bean plants needed to survive and grow. Which gas do the plants need when they make their own food?oxygennitrogenhydrogencarbon dioxide
Which factor causes global wind patterns?changes in the distance between Earth and the Moonunequal heating of Earth's surface by the Sundaily changes in the tilt of Earth's axisrapid rotation of the Sun on its axis
The statement "gold is more dense than lead" isa fact because most people agree.a fact because it has been observed and tested.an opinion because both metals are hard to find.an opinion because more research is needed.
Which process contributes most to the formation of a sinkhole?plate movementvolcanic eruptionwind erosionchemical weathering
Which of these questions is best answered by observing the habitat of an insect?How much does an insect weigh?How long does an insect live?When does an insect breed?Where does an insect live?
Which characteristic of frogs is an adaptation to living in water?strong legswebbed feetdull colorsmoist skin
In the construction of a house, the words excavation, slab, and footing are associated with theroof.floor.frame.foundation.
Habitat becomes a major factor in the extinction of a species whengenetic diversity is not achieved.competitive species are introduced.changes in behavior start to develop.smaller populations fail to breed.
Every copy of a particular protein manufactured by a cell shows the same incorrect amino acid at the same point in its structure. According to the central dogma of molecular biology, in which structure does this error originate?DNAmRNAtRNArRNA
Some molecules used to manufacture plastic objects are long and tangled. They straighten when force is applied to them and then return to their shorter, tangled shape. Which common object is most likely made using such molecules?helmet shellsrubber bandsplumbing pipesdrinking cups
Water that evaporates from lakes and streams condenses into clouds and later falls as rain. The property of water that is demonstrated is the ability toact as a universal solvent.change from a liquid to a gas.boil at a high temperature.absorb large amounts of energy.
The top layers of soil are important because they -prevent earthquakesgive plants nutrientsprotect the bedrockmake walking easier
A scientific guess about the cause and effect of an event is calleda variable.a theory.a hypothesis.an observation.
What features do all insects have?Number of LEGS 2 Number of BODY PARTS 4Number of LEGS 4 Number of BODY PARTS 2Number of LEGS 6 Number of BODY PARTS 3Number of LEGS 8 Number of BODY PARTS 3
How does a mushroom obtain energy?by attaching to green plants and taking the plants' foodby combining carbon dioxide and water to make its own foodby absorbing matter from dead organisms to use as foodby attacking bacteria and using the bacteria as food
Three main sequence stars are being compared. Which characteristic would these three stars most likely have in common?chemical compositiondistance from Earthtemperaturebrightness
Some natural disasters can have a large effect on the global climate. Which type of natural disaster would produce the greatest decrease in solar radiation reaching the surface of Earth for the longest period of time?a giant tsunamia strong earthquakea powerful hurricanea large volcanic eruption
What object is made of hot gas and is the most massive object in our solar system?the Sunan asteroida cometa terrestrial planet
Which of the following is a slow process that changes Earth's surface?floodingearthquakewind erosionvolcanic eruption
Which of the following is the greatest source of wild fish for human populations?pondslakesriversoceans
Which best describes the characteristics of a river basin?the land drained by a river and its tributariesthe land formed when rivers create estuaries and marshesthe land at the mouth of a river where water flows into the oceanthe land formed as a result of a river flooding
Tides on Earth are influenced more by the Moon than the Sun because the Moon isbrighter than the Sun.larger than Earth.colder than Earth.closer than the Sun.
When dense, cold air pushes beneath warmer atmospheric air, the lighter, warmer air rises. As this air rises into the atmosphere, it cools and some of the water vapor in it condenses. Which of the following will most likely form as this occurs?a clouda rainbowa sunseta tornado
Herbivores that evolved on grassy plains are likely to naturally select for traits different than herbivores that evolved in rain forests. Which trait is a plains herbivore most likely to develop over thousands of years?long legs for runningsharp claws for climbingwebbed feet for swimmingprehensile tail for hanging from trees
A student writes the following statement in a journal: "It was 84°F at 3 p.m. on Tuesday in the schoolyard." This statement best describes which system?local weatherlocal climateregional weatherregional climate
When using a hot plate, students should notleave the hot plate unattended.follow the teacher's instructions.pull back hair or clothing to avoid contact.wear insulated gloves when holding metal materials.
Which subatomic particles are involved in the nuclear fusion that powers the Sun?protons and neutronselectrons and protonsonly protonsonly electrons
What do all vertebrate animals have in common?They all have fur.They all have backbones.They all are warm-blooded.They all have young that look like the adults.
When astronomers want to measure the distance between nearby stars, they often usequasars.parallax.visible light.spectrographs.
Which of these is the best evidence that Earth's continental landmasses drifted apart over time?the fossil record along the edges of continentsthe rocky coastlines at the edges of continentsthe distribution of biomes on all the continentsthe prevalence of granite on all the continents
In humans, where does the absorption of food into the blood stream mainly take place?stomachmouthlarge intestinessmall intestines
Which human activity contributes to the formation of acid rain?using too much fertilizer in agriculturecutting down large areas of tropical forestsburning fossil fuels such as coal and gasolineusing chemicals that destroy ozone in the stratosphere
What procedure should be performed after any handling of a plant sample in a lab?applying disinfectant to the countersthrowing away plant material in the trashwashing hands with an antibacterial soapplacing hands under an ultraviolet light
In which of the following cases would a decrease in friction be most beneficial?the friction between the shoes of a jogger and the jogging trackthe friction between the wheels of a car and the surface of a roadthe friction between a rotating pulley and the axle that supports the pulleythe friction between a rotating pulley and the rope that is used with the pulley
Decayed prehistoric plants have helped in the formation ofcoal, oil, and gas.coal, shale, and quartz.shale, quartz, and coal.oil, shale, and granite.
Oxygen and sugar are the products ofcell division.digestion.photosynthesis.respiration.
Scientists often work together to solve a problem. Sometimes they work in laboratories. Sometimes they are outside doing fieldwork. The chart provides a list of some careers in science. Which scientists might work together to save a polluted wetland?chemist, botanist and ecologistastronomer, ecologist and physicistphysicist, paleontologist and chemistbotanist, astronomer and paleontologist
How many chromosomes are found in a fertilized human egg cell?22234446
Peptide bonds in proteins can be broken down by the enzyme peptidase. Adrian orders a hamburger and French fries for lunch. He adds cheese and mayonnaise to his hamburger, and then sits down to eat lunch with his friends. Which structure would most likely result from the action of peptidase in Adrian's small intestine?lipidglucoseamino acidhydrocarbon
Cows are farm animals that eat only plants. Which of these kinds of living things is a cow?DecomposerHerbivoreCarnivoreProducer
Bone cells need nutrients. Which two systems get nutrients to bone cells?the digestive system and the circulatory systemthe circulatory system and the respiratory systemthe respiratory system and the skeletal systemthe skeletal system and the digestive system
Which describes a material that is not a food?It stores energy but not nutrients.It does not store energy or nutrients.It stores energy and nutrients.It does not store energy but stores nutrients.
An example of a calcium carbonate deposit in the lithosphere islimestone.granite.gneiss.shale.
The color in a Tortoiseshell cat can only be produced by two X chromosomes. This would mean that these types of cats are alwaysmale.female.fertile.aggressive.
Which is the most appropriate SI unit to use for expressing the mass of an automobile?millimetermilligramkilometerkilogram
Some scientists think their new car fuel will produce fewer chemicals than burning gasoline. The scientists test their hypothesis by performing several trials to compare the fuels. If the results of the trials agree with their hypothesis, in which area will their research most likely help?recycling trashconserving waterreducing air pollutionprotecting endangered species
A student sets up an investigation to test the strength of magnets. He has several magnets of different sizes, shapes, and masses. He uses the magnets to lift metal paper clips. How is the strength of a magnet defined in the investigation?by the mass of the magnet lifting the metal paper clipsby the size of the magnet lifting the metal paper clipsby the number of metal paper clips lifted by the magnetby the time the metal paper clips stay on the magnet
Which of these is the best example of organisms interacting with each other in an ecosystem?a buffalo drinking watera bear catching a fisha rabbit running across the sanda pig rolling in the mud
A television commercial claims that an all-natural cereal will provide the daily nutrition needed for adults. Which information on the cereal box best supports this claim?the average serving sizethe list of ingredients in the cerealthe number of ounces of cereal in the boxthe amount of sugar in the cereal
Which process in an apple tree primarily results from cell division?growthphotosynthesisgas exchangewaste removal
Which of these must be absorbed by animal cells in order to grow?genessunlightnutrientschromosomes
In which type of blood vessel is blood pressure normally monitored?capillariesarteriesveinscilia
Which of the following correctly explains how atmospheric nitrogen is converted to nitrogen compounds used by living organisms?Sunlight converts atmospheric nitrogen to a form usable by protists.Plant leaves convert atmospheric nitrogen to a form usable by animals.Bacteria in soil convert atmospheric nitrogen to a form usable by plants.Invertebrate animals in soil convert atmospheric nitrogen to a form usable by fungi.
A sailboat travels 35 km in 5 hr. Which of the following describes the motion of the sailboat?Its momentum is 7 km/hr.Its acceleration is 7 km/hr.Its displacement is 7 km/hr.Its average speed is 7 km/hr.
A movie studio will use two methods of communication, television and the Internet, to advertise a new movie. Which of the following must both methods of communication use in order to show the advertisements to viewers around the world?systems to locate viewersnetworks to transmit signalsprinting to create the imagessoftware to search for images
A medium-sized star in the middle of its life cycle, such as the Sun, is most likely to emit which color of light?redbluewhiteyellow
A satellite image can help scientists locate the area where two plates have diverged by showing the existence ofplateaus.mountains.rift valleys.grassy plains.
Which device would most likely be used to produce light energy?a lasera radioa toastera microwave
Scientists at a local university have been studying the impact that people have on Earth. One of the areas being studied is how the burning of fossil fuels affects the environment. Which effect of fossil fuel burning have the scientists most likely evaluated?the production of nitrogen-fixing bacteriathe mechanical weathering of roadsthe formation of acid rainthe increase in runoff
Which statement best explains why photosynthesis is the foundation of most food webs?Sunlight is the source of energy for nearly all ecosystems.Most ecosystems are found on land instead of in water.Carbon dioxide is more available than other gases.The producers in all ecosystems are plants.
Which piece of safety equipment is used to keep mold spores from entering the respiratory system?safety gogglesbreathing maskrubber gloveslead apron
Meiosis is a type of cell division in which germ cells divide to produce haploid cells. Where does meiosis occur?brain cellsbone cellsmuscle cellsovary cells
Which characteristic describes the texture of a kitten's fur?graywarmlongsoft
Which best describes the structure of an atom?a lightweight core surrounded by neutral particlesa massive core surrounded by negatively-charged particlesa network of interacting positive and negative particlesoverlapping layers of neutral, positive, and negative particles
To express the distance between the Milky Way galaxy and other galaxies, the most appropriate unit of measurement is themeter.kilometer.light-year.astronomical unit.
A student has just completed a laboratory activity. What is the last action that the student should perform before leaving the lab area?wash handsturn off all equipmentput away all glasswarewash instruments and table tops
Students are investigating the effects of different fertilizers on plant growth. Which units would be best to measure the mass of the fertilizer used?meterscentimetersgramsmilligrams
Plants use sunlight to makesoil.minerals.food.water.
Which of these correctly identifies the way materials are transported in a plant?Xylem carries water from the roots to the leaves.Phloem carries minerals from the roots to the leaves.Xylem carries sugars from the flowers to the stems.Phloem carries water from the flowers to the stems.
When trees develop leaves in the spring, 10 changes occur on the forest floor. Why does the development of leaves cause changes on the forest floor?Rainfall increases.Sunlight is reduced.Wind speed increases.Animal migration is stopped.
The circulatory system and the endocrine system work together in the human body. Which describes one way in which these systems interact?taking in oxygen and transporting it to cells of the bodyreleasing hormones and transporting them to cells of the bodyabsorbing nutrients from food and transporting them to cells in the bodycollecting waste products from the cells and transporting it out of the body
A student throws a ball into the air. While the ball travels up, the speed of the ball decreases. What force causes the ball to slow while traveling up?electricitygravitymagnetismtension
Which of these will most likely harm a habitat?planting treeswater pollutionrainfallsunlight
All living and nonliving material is composed ofairelementswatersoil
Which process best explains how the Grand Canyon became so wide?foldingerosiondepositionsedimentation
As global temperatures increase, certain organisms will be more affected than others. The changes associated with global warming may result in an increase in sea level. Which organisms will be affected most as a result of the change in sea level?birds that eat fish from shallow watersfish that live in coral reefs in shallow watersmammals that swim in cold, deep ocean waterscrustaceans at the bottom of deep sea ocean waters
A dish of sugar water was left on a window sill. One week later, there were only sugar crystals left in the dish. The water was gone. The best explanation for the appearance of sugar crystals issome of the water was absorbed by the dish.the air condensed.the light shining on the window sill produced more sugar.the water evaporated.
Using a softball bat to hit a softball is an example of using which simple machine?pulleyleverinclined planewheel and axle
When an igneous intrusion comes into contact with surrounding rock, the surrounding rock willerode.foliate.precipitate.recrystallize.
A research scientist writes a paper on the initial regrowth of a forest after a fire has damaged the entire ecosystem. Which title would be best for the paper?Primary SuccessionStable CommunitiesClimax CommunitiesSecondary Succession
Where do plants get most of the energy they need to live and grow?watersoilairsunlight
Which is a statement about climate?The average temperature yesterday was 15°C.The temperature range today was 10°C to 20°C.The high temperature tomorrow will be 14°C.The average high temperature in May is 20°C.
While on a movie set, a stuntman jumps off the roof of a building. As he falls toward an airbag, what is increasing?gravitywind velocitykinetic energypotential energy
Jessica wants to see cells in an oak tree leaf. Which tool is best for Jessica to use to see the cells?binocularsmicroscopereading glassesmagnifying glass
Biologists conduct investigations to learn about living organisms. Which method helps reduce bias during an investigation?developing a hypothesis after collecting data in the investigationlimiting the amount of background research before the investigationdesigning an investigation with repeated trials during the investigationobtaining other opinions concerning what should happen during the investigation
Which factor is most likely to cause the number of rabbits living in an area to increase?less waterfewer predatorslack of shelterlimited food
Seeds that remain inactive until the right conditions of light, water, and soil are present are called ___.pollendormantflowersrecycled
What allows a light bulb to give off light?the current flowing through the wire to the light bulbthe light bulb giving electrical energy to the batterythe light bulb generating heat energythe battery pushing light through the wire
What causes sound?sunlightvibrationsx-rayspitch
Photosynthesis occurs in which of these organisms?Sunflower plantMushroomSunfishLuna moth
In order for cells to grow at a normal rate, they musttake in light.be specialized.take in nutrients.be of similar size.
Marshall learned that plants need a substance from the air to make their own food. What does a plant take from the air in the presence of sunlight?carbon dioxidehydrogennitrogenoxygen
Antarctica is a continent at Earth's south pole. Fossils of tropical fern plants were discovered in Antarctica even though these plants do not grow there today. Which conclusion does the fossil evidence best support?Millions of years ago, Antarctica was in a warmer location on Earth.Recently, a natural disaster killed all of the fern plants in Antarctica.Recently, birds stopped carrying the seeds of fern plants to Antarctica.Millions of years ago, Earth's south pole was much colder than it is today.
Which two theories of Moon formation propose that much or all of the material comprising the Moon came from Earth?The Fission Theory and The Coaccretion TheoryThe Coaccretion Theory and The Capture TheoryThe Fission Theory and the Giant Impact TheoryThe Capture Theory and the Giant Impact Theory
When white, fluffy clouds appear in Massachusetts, the weather that day will MOST LIKELY befair.stormy.foggy.rainy.
Plants and animals are composed of organic compounds. Which of the following are the common elements found in organic compounds?iron, oxygen, nickel, copper.sodium, potassium, gold, hydrogen.helium, neon, argon, krypton.carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen.
New research uncovers information that proves that the data from an old theory is partially incorrect. What should the scientific community do about the old theory?remove the old theory from historical recordschange the research notes in the original theoryuse the new information to update the old theoryban the public from discussing the old theory
Which is the greatest benefit of sexual reproduction?capable of reproducing by meiosisability to reproduce without a mateability to produce genetically different offspringcapable of producing offspring genetically identical to parent
The speed at which sound waves travel depends on thedistance between the vibration source and the receiver.type of material through which the sound travels.size of the object making the sound.type of device making the sound.
Which scientist is credited with discovering the first four moons of Jupiter?Galileo GalileiAlbert EinsteinCharles DarwinSir Isaac Newton
During science class, a teacher explains that the samples the students are studying are made of two or more minerals. What are the students studying?gasesrockselementsmolecules
When the Northern Hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun causing the rays of light to hit Earth at large angles, which season occurs?winterspringsummerfall
A scientist found fossils of ocean shells on a mountain top. Based on this find, which statement can be made?The climate was once colder.The shells were carried by the wind.The mountain was covered by water.The shells once lived on dry land.
A student sees many plants around a pond. The student can determine which plants are nonvascular byobserving if they lack true stems, roots, or leavesexamining the plants for sporescounting the number of leaves on each stalknoticing if the plants are near rocks
Darryl learns that freezing temperatures may help cause weathering. Which statement explains how freezing temperatures most likely cause weathering?by freezing the leaves on treesby causing rocks to stick togetherby turning acid rain into acid snowby freezing water in the cracks of rocks
A bond is formed when an electron is transferred from a sodium atom to a chlorine atom. What happens to the sodium atom during this process?The mass of the atom increases.The atom becomes an isotope.The atomic number decreases.The atom becomes a positive ion.
A group of fish was released into a local lake. This species of fish had never lived in the lake before. Scientists want to collect data on how the lake's ecosystem is affected by the new fish. Which method of data collection will give the most accurate results?Measuring oxygen levels in the lake for two monthsChecking the lake water for nutrient levels on one daySampling fish populations in the lake over several yearsObserving the surface of the lake for signs of the new fish after one week
On a career day at school, an X-ray technician discusses her daily work with the class. Which equipment would she most likely say she uses on a regular basis to help ensure the safety of patients?earplugsrubber glovesgoggleslead aprons
In the United States, windmills have been used for farming for hundreds of years. Which simple machine is the most important part of a windmill?leverpulleyinclined planewheel and axle
Which tools are needed to measure the effects of friction on a block of wood?meter stick, spring scalebalance, stopwatchbalance, meter stickmeter stick, stopwatch
Planets outside of our solar system have been detected. What suggested the presence of a planet outside of our solar system?radio wave emissionsa wobble in the rotation of the starregular occurring eclipses of its moonsthe discovery of a star as large as our own
During which process are pieces of rock material being moved over Earth's surface by water and wind?conductiondepositionerosionrevolution
The Apollo 11 mission was able to retrieve samples of the Moon's surface because it was the first mission to have astronautsland on the Moonorbit a planetreturn to Earthwalk in space
A student mixes a teaspoon of sugar in a large glass of water. What happens to the sugar when it is mixed with the water?It boils.It melts.It dissolves.It evaporates.
Particle accelerators, such as the Large Hadron Collider in Europe, accelerate subatomic particles to great speeds. These particles move in opposite directions at nearly the speed of light and collide into one another to simulate conditions that were present as the universe formed. Which property of matter in the initial moments of the universe are these accelerators designed to simulate?low densityhigh energymassive nucleicircular movement
A doorbell circuit converts electrical energy into mechanical energy. The mechanical energy is in the form of vibrations that ultimately producechemical energy.thermal energy.radiant energy.sound energy.
Which factor determines if two individuals are members of the same species?They live in the same habitat and niche.They forage and eat the same type of food.They mate and produce fertile offspring.They are similar in appearance and color.
Which of the following planets is always closer to the Sun than it is to Earth?JupiterMercurySaturnUranus
Cells need nutrients for energy. Which system is responsible for breaking down food to provide cellular energy?digestiveexcretorycirculatoryrespiratory
During which activity should a student wear goggles?writing a science reportmixing baking soda with watermeasuring the length of a shadowexamining a leaf with a microscope
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a soil bacterium that is toxic to certain insects. Genes from this bacterium have been inserted into cotton to make Bt cotton. Farmers that use Bt cotton would most likely use less of which of the following?waterfertilizerherbicideinsecticide
A student examined a rock sample and described it as having particles of various colors that were 1 millimeter to 12 millimeters in size. The student was makingan inferencea hypothesisa predictionan observation
What are genes composed of?offspringDNAcellstraits
In a classroom demonstration, a teacher pours sulfuric acid on some granulated sugar in a beaker. The sugar turns yellow and then black. Smoke rises and a strong smell is released. This demonstration is an example of what kind of change?chemicalphysicalmagneticelectric
Marta studied different forms of energy. Which two types of energy travel in waves?light and soundelectrical and soundchemical and lightchemical and electrical
The tops of some mountains are sharp and pointed, while the tops of others are smooth and rounded. This difference was most likely caused byrivers flooding along a coastal plain.erosion and weathering.earthquakes and waves.rocks melted underground by lava.
A student suggests to the school board that they use a renewable energy source. The student suggests they usecoal.wind.wood.natural gas.
Solar radiation provides more heat near the equator than near the poles on Earth. The greatest amount of heat is moved away from the equator byocean currents.aquatic plants.surface winds.tectonic plates.
Which human activity will help conserve Earth's natural resources?leaving the television on all dayrecycling plastic bottlescutting down treesburning trash in the yard
Which characteristic helps some animals defend themselves against predators?strong odorpoor hearingweak eyesightshivering
Most plants begin their life cycle as ___.leavesflowersrootsseeds
Erin wants to make a strong, light chair. Which natural material should she use?irongraniteclaywood
Jonathon was studying bears. He found out that bears are born with some behaviors and learn others from their environment. Which behavior does a bear most likely inherit?how to find food in garbage canshow to hibernate during the winterhow to seek shelter in a hollow loghow to live in human neighborhoods
A group of the same species of fish swim together to increase an individual'sswimming speed.body temperature.chance of survival.visibility to predators.
In the oxygen cycle, which group of organisms replenishes a large portion of the atmospheric oxygen supply?mammalsfungiinsectsplants
Some antibiotics used to treat infections in humans are also used to treat chickens, but some groups oppose this practice. The overuse of the antibiotics will most likely influence the natural selection of which type of organisms?chickens that naturally make the antibioticsmicrobes that are resistant to the antibioticsmicrobes that are susceptible to the antibioticschickens that are resistant to infection
A student performs a lab investigation by measuring the average time it takes for a toy car to travel 10 meters. Why is it best to perform the experiment in three trials?to form a good hypothesisto increase the accuracy of the resultsto make the results more significantto better explain the investigation to others
A scientist finds a metamorphic rock formation next to a magma chamber and determines that it was originally a sedimentary rock formation. He concludes that the temperature of the magma chamber caused the rock formation to become metamorphic. Which is another reliable explanation of how the rock formation was changed?weight of heavy machinery moving over the rockspressure on the rock formation inside Eartha sandstorm that caused the rocks to be erodeda quick burial of the rocks by tons of volcanic ash
Earth orbiting the Sun causesthe changing of the seasons.daily tidal cycles.day to become night.the phases of the Moon.
The cycle of night and day on Earth is a result ofthe Moon revolving around Earth.Earth revolving around the Sun.the Moon rotating on its axis.Earth rotating on its axis.
Which of these traits is most influenced by environment?weighthair colorblood typehandedness
Which statement describes a characteristic of a gas that has a significant effect on the climates of both Earth and Venus?Nitrogen is chemically inert.Sodium vapor reflects solar energy.Carbon dioxide traps solar energy.Argon is unable to react with water.
DNA technology has improved greatly in the last twenty years. Which task has been made easier by the development of DNA technology?identifying genetic disordersdetermining the parts of an atomobserving distant objects in spacemaking very accurate measurements
Which condition is necessary for metamorphic rocks to form?constant weathering and erosionextreme pressure and heatingrapid burial of sedimentsslow cooling of magma
Which event helps to renew a resource?A seed is planted from a tree.An offshore rig pumps oil.A car is filled with gasoline.An office is heated with coal.
Which part of a plant takes in water and nutrients from the soil?rootstemflowerleaf
A certain type of hybrid car utilizes a braking system in which energy is recovered and stored in batteries. This is an example of which type of energy conversion?kinetic energy converted to potential energychemical energy converted to kinetic energychemical energy converted to thermal energythermal energy converted to potential energy
Clownfish take shelter in the tentacles of sea anemones and keep sea anemones clean. Which type of relationship does this represent?parasitismcommensalismmutualismneutralism
Some animals have behaviors that help them find food when little is available. Which best describes an animal with this type of behavior?a robin that builds a nestan owl that calls at nighta duck that swims in watera goose that migrates in winter
Part of a student's experiment is to measure changes in wind speed several hours before a storm. What piece of equipment should the student use?barometerhygrometeranemometerweather vane
An organism is born with a genetic abnormality not present in any of its ancestors. This abnormality is most likely the result ofcirculationcompetitionmutationrespiration
The length of one day on Earth is determined by how long it takesthe Moon to revolve oncethe Moon to rotate onceEarth to rotate onceEarth to revolve once
When a rock is placed in a graduated cylinder containing water, the height of the water willdecreaseincreaseremain the same
A student heats the same amount of two different liquids over Bunsen burners. Each liquid is at room temperature when the student begins. If liquid 1 has a higher specific heat than liquid 2, then liquid 1 willevaporate sooner.take longer to increase in temperature.condense over a longer period.chemically break down at a faster rate.
Through which activity do animals get the carbon that is needed for their bodies?eatingbreathingrunningsleeping
Scientists have discovered organisms that thrive in hot water that is 90°C (194°F) and do not need sunlight or oxygen to live. Into which kingdom would the scientists classify these organisms?ArchaebacteriaFungiPlantaeProtista
A cook touches a hot stove and quickly moves his hand away. What are the two primary body systems that work together to produce this response?Integumentary and endocrine systemsMuscular and respiratory systemsNervous and muscular systemsSkeletal and nervous systems
Which statement correctly describes both gases and liquids?Their shapes stay the same in any container.Their shapes change when they are in different containers.Their volumes stay the same in any container.Their volumes change when they are in different containers.
When the soil is saturated, earthworms move to the top of the soil to obtain oxygen. This behavior is evidence of which biological concept in earthworms?learned behaviormigration instinctresponse to stimulireproductive strategy
Which of the following is more likely to occur in a plant cell than in an animal cell?synthesis of enzymesformation of cellulosebreakdown of glucoseactive transport of ions
Earth revolves around the sun. The amount of time needed for Earth to complete one revolution around the sun is approximately1 day28 days180 days365 days
Excess nitrogen fertilizers sometimes drain into waterways that flow into the Chesapeake Bay. This nitrogen may cause algae blooms, which reduce dissolved oxygen in the water. How does nitrogen negatively affect the Chesapeake Bay?fish births increasefish populations decreasesediment on the bottom of the bay decreasesthe rate of water runoff into the bay increases
Mount Arenal, a volcano in Costa Rica, is erupting. Heat is being released during the eruption. What is the source of the heat?The heat comes from the Sun.The heat comes from pools of underground water.The heat comes from deep within Earth.The heat comes from decaying plants and animals.
Which statement describes how the umbilical cord supports a developing fetus?It provides a protective barrier between the mother and the fetus.It keeps the fetus inside the mother until birth.It provides a navel when the baby is born.It supplies oxygen and nutrients to the fetus.
Which two human body systems are most responsible for getting oxygen to cells?digestive and skeletalskeletal and circulatorycirculatory and respiratoryrespiratory and digestive
In their science classroom, Sam and Julia cross a heterozygous tall (Tt) pea plant with a homozygous short (tt) pea plant. What ratio represents the results Sam and Julia can expect?1 tall plant to 3 short plants2 tall plants to 2 short plants3 tall plants to 1 short plant4 tall plants to 0 short plants
When atmospheric carbon dioxide increases, some of the carbon dioxide dissolves in the ocean causing the ocean to becomewarmer.cooler.more acidic.more alkaline.
Over time, dried lava from an old volcano is worn down and broken into small pieces. When these pieces pile up and are cemented together to form new rock, how would this new rock be classified?magmaigneoussedimentarymetamorphic
When potassium and bromine atoms form chemical bonds, which of these is produced?an elementa mixturea compounda new form of matter
How often does Earth rotate on its axis?once every 12 hoursonce every 24 hoursonce every monthonce every year
The elements that make up the atmosphere of Earth can be listed as percentages or can be shown in a graph. Which type of graph would best show this information?a bar grapha pie charta line grapha scatterplot
Animals give off carbon dioxide that plants take in through leaves. What do plants give off as a result of photosynthesis that animals need to breathe?heatoxygenproteinwater
Air is composed of many different substances. Which of the following components of air is a compound rather than an element?Argon, ArOxygen, O2Water, H2ONitrogen, N2
Which factor is responsible for the presence of equatorial deserts?global warmingasteroid impactstilt of the Earth's axisthe solar activity cycle
The ash borer moth looks similar to a wasp, but it does not have the ability to sting. This adaptation most likely helps the moth survive becauseit makes food easier to find.predators avoid the moth.it aids in attracting a mate.the moth blends in with its surroundings.
Which organ system communicates with cells in muscle tissue so that the muscles contract or relax, allowing the body to move?circulatory systemnervous systemrespiratory systemexcretory system
Which device produces mechanical energy?a batteryan electric motora light bulba solar cooker
A beach is formed when sediment is deposited along a shoreline. What would most likely happen if rivers that empty into the ocean were dammed?Less sediment would be deposited along the shoreline.Beaches would form from different materials.Sand dunes would become smaller.Deltas would become larger.
Due to extreme pressure, the inner core of Earth issolid.liquid.gas.plasma.
The speed and general direction of motion of a galaxy relative to the Earth can be determined bymeasuring its red shift.the gravity it exerts.contrasting it against nearby stars.observing its motion across the sky.
What are the three common states of matter?liquid, gas, vaporgas, liquid, fluidsolid, gas, liquidsolid, vapor, liquid
What is the primary reason for breaking down food molecules?to absorb water into a cellto provide energy for a cellto remove wastes from a cellto store materials in a cell
Topsoil is considered to be most fertile when it has alow pH level.low sand content.high organic matter level.high parent rock material level.
When chemicals in the atmosphere dissolve in water droplets, they precipitate with the water and pollute water reservoirs on Earth. The pollutants enter the food chain when aquatic organisms absorb them. Which of these pollutants eventually contaminates fish after coal is burned?leadarsenicmercuryaluminum
An atom has a mass of 24 and a nuclear charge of 12. Which statement about the atom is accurate?It has twice as many protons as electrons.It has twice as many neutrons as protons.It has equal numbers of neutrons and protons.It has equal numbers of nuclear particles and electrons.
Which is an example of a renewable energy resource?biomasscoalgasoil
The compression of matter due to gravitational attraction increased as the protoplanets formed. What was a result of this compression within each protoplanet?initiation of nuclear fusionincrease in noble gas destabilizationincrease in thermal energyinitiation of photosynthesis reactions
The construction of Hoover Dam on the Colorado River resulted in abundant freshwater and electrical power for the region. Which of these is a disadvantage of the construction of Hoover Dam?an increase in flooding downstreaman increase in regional humiditya decrease in the amount of river ecosystemsa decrease in the amount of water for irrigation
If you place a thermometer into a glass of boiling water, what temperature should the thermometer read?32°C100°C200°C212°C
What characteristic of carbon [C] makes it essential to living organisms?Carbon forms crystal structures under certain conditions.Carbon can exist as a solid, liquid, or gas.Carbon bonds in many ways with itself to form chains.Carbon exists in radioactive forms.
Scientists found evidence of a fish that lived millions of years ago. The fish had features that were possibly used to move on land. This fish is now extinct. What scientific evidence did the scientists most likely find that confirmed the existence of this fish?a fossila descriptiona photographa cave drawing
What is the smallest unit of a chemical compound that still has the properties of that compound?a nucleusa moleculean elementan atom
A student is investigating in which type of soil a plant will grow best. Which should the student measure to answer the question?height of the plantsweight of the soilamount of water usedtemperature of the room
An animal has scales and uses only its lungs to exchange gases. What is the animal most likely to be classified as?a fisha reptilea mammalan amphibian
How are igneous and sedimentary rocks similar?They are both formed by erosion.They are both formed from cooled lava.Heat and pressure can turn them into lava.Heat and pressure can turn them into metamorphic rock.
When both a dominant and recessive gene are present, which of the following is true?The dominant trait will be visible.The recessive trait will be visible.Neither trait will be visible.It cannot be predicted which trait will be visible.
Squirrels in cold climates gather and store food for winter. The squirrels sometimes bury nuts and then do not return for them. These nuts can grow to become trees. This chain of events is an example ofpredationseed distributioncompetitionseed fossilization
Kurt drinks frozen fruit juice from a small cup. He measures the amount of fruit juice in the cup. Which property is Kurt measuring?densityheighttemperaturevolume
A simple machine that has a mechanical advantage equal to 1 would most likely be used todecrease effort.decrease work.change direction.change resistance.
Roberto is sliding down a plastic slide on the playground. After he reaches the ground, he feels a small electric shock when he touches a piece of metal. What has been built up on his body that causes the shock?atomselectronsneutronsprotons
Plants grow best in soils that are rich in which of the following?grains of sandlumps of claylayers of graveldecaying plants and animals
The rate of acceleration of an object is determined by the mass of the object andthe initial velocity of the object.the forces acting on the object.the direction of movement of the object.the change in kinetic energy of the object.
Some aquifers are composed of limestone and dolomite. Which process increases the open spaces of the aquifer formation?wave actionwind erosiontensional faultingchemical weathering
Leather basketballs are made for indoor use on smooth surfaces. Rubber basketballs are made for use on many different surfaces. Which of the following properties of rubber makes it better than leather for use on many different surfaces?Rubber is durable.Rubber is lightweight.Rubber is dark in color.Rubber is quickly produced.
On a field trip in a wooded area, you see a small, strange object. You wonder whether it is a live animal. The best way to find out is to observe the object to see if ithas an odor.has separate parts.can make a noise and has a lifelike color.carries out basic life functions.
Ethanol is a type of alcohol made from plants. Sugarcane and corn, which are both used in foods such as cereals and breads, are used to make ethanol. Burning ethanol provides a clean source of energy because the products of ethanol are water and carbon dioxide. Therefore, mixing ethanol with gasoline reduces harmful waste products. In the 1970s, many Brazilians drove cars with engines that used an ethanol gasoline mixture. This alternative fuel conserved the limited supply of gasoline available at that time. In the 1990s, gasoline became cheaper than ethanol, and Brazilians returned to driving more gasoline-fueled cars. Recently, Brazilians started driving more cars that use an ethanol-gasoline mixture. Ethanol is a good alternative fuel because itreduces air pollutionincreases biodiversityreduces sound pollutionincreases ozone emissions
A whistle produces a sound because blowing air in the whistle causesthe whistle material to shake.the air inside the whistle to vibrate.the air to be absorbed by the whistle.the air in the whistle to heat up and expand.
Each year the Earth moves once aroundMarsthe Sunthe Moonall the other planets
According to Newton's first law of motion, what counteracts gravity to keep a satellite in orbit?inertiaenergyfrictionmagnetism
How do plants get water and minerals?absorbed from the soil though the rootsabsorbed from the soil through the stemabsorbed from the air through the flowersabsorbed from the air through the leaves
A cell's chromosomes containgeneschlorophyllspermeggs
Which of these events is an example of a change in climate?Afternoon clouds form and block the sunlight.A series of tornadoes occurs over a one-week period.An overnight temperature drop causes frost to form.The average amount of annual precipitation decreases.
Which object works best when reflecting light?mirrorcamerabinocularseyeglasses
A wetland was drained to build a mall. Two years later, there were no more toads in that area. Why did the toads disappear?The toads were destroyed by the construction equipment.The toads died because toads cannot breathe out of water.The toads were frightened and went into the woods.The toads go their food from the wetland ecosystem.
Which elements are found to the right of the zigzag line in the periodic table?liquidsmetalsmetals and gasesnonmetals and gases
Miranda learned how the human body carries out life functions. Which is the most basic level of organization in the human body?an organa systema tissuea cell
Pollutants, such as motor oil and gasoline, are sometimes leaked onto roads by vehicles. How do these pollutants most likely affect the environment?Storms wash the pollutants into lakes and rivers.Animals become sick from licking the pollutants on the road.Animals get stuck in the pollutants when they cross the road.Winds blow the pollutants to the side of the road and harm the soil.
Which of the following objects is probably the most flexible?a ceramic disha wooden blocka short steel roda new rubber hose
A student practicing for the outdoor track team begins to sweat. To what stimulus is the body responding?an increase in heart ratean increase in body temperaturean increase in oxygen demandan increase in breathing rate
What repeating cycle is responsible for the four seasons that occur on Earth?rotation of the moonrotation of the Sunrevolution of the sun in the galaxyrevolution of the earth about the sun
Which of these systems functions to protect and support vital organs?digestiveskeletalnervousexcretory
Which characteristic would best help a rabbit survive in snow?short legsdim eyesightthick, white furslow movement
Scientists are studying a pond. Which property can the scientists measure to understand the amount of energy held by the lake water?the depth of the lakethe color of the waterthe volume of the lakethe temperature of the water
Russell wants to observe changes in nature over the next few months. What can a thermometer help Russell investigate?rainfall amounts each weektiny organisms in pond waterthe high temperatures each daythe amount of growth in a plant
The egg stage in the life cycle of a bird is most like which phase in the life cycle of certain types of flowers?seedsporepollenimmature flower
Peristalsis helps move nutrients through parts of the body by using wavelike contractions. In which system is the function used?circulatorydigestiveendocrinenervous
Which is the best way to help prevent the flu from becoming a pandemic?getting a vaccinationtaking antibioticseating fruits and vegetableswashing hands often
Which theory states that the universe originated as a single mass?Big BangSteady StateAstronomicalCatastrophism
As two continental plates collide, the edges of the plates are crumpled and uplifted. Which of these landforms is most likely a result of this type of collision?normal faultsmountain rangesU-shaped valleysshield volcanoes
During a walk in the woods, Mandy finds a plant structure that had fallen onto the trail. Mandy can tell the object contained seeds, and thinks it came from a flowering plant instead of a conifer. How can she determine if the object came from a flowering plant?by looking for seed coats on the seedsby looking for wing-like structures on the seedsby looking for fruit tissue around the seedsby looking for young sporophytes inside the seeds
The esophagus, stomach, and small intestine are parts of which body system?nervousdigestiverespiratorymuscular
Which of the following is a chemical property of silver?malleablewhite metalconductor of heatreacts with nitric acid
If the climate in an area changed over time to become very cold, which change would most likely help a species living there to survive?a thicker neck and longer taila larger mouth and stronger jawsan increase in fur and fatan increase in height and speed
A broken bone heals through the process ofadaptationmutationcell divisionchemical digestion
Which is the best example of an object with kinetic energy?a plate sitting on a tablea bird perching in a treea marble rolling down a rampa dam holding back some water
Lions tend to prey on primary consumers like zebras and gazelles. If there were a sudden decline in a population of lions, which ecological imbalance would most likely occur in the habitat?overgrazingeutrophicationinvasion by non-native speciesoverproduction of greenhouse gases
Which of the following could help to reduce a home heating bill in winter?replacing wood doors with aluminum doorsusing more insulation in the walls of the homeremoving thick rugs and heavy curtains in the homepainting the roof of the home white to reflect light
Elizabeth uses a specific type of whistle to call her dogs. The noise made by the whistle is heard by the dogs but cannot be heard by the human ear. Which statement best describes why humans cannot hear the sound made by the whistle?The speed of the sound is too fast.The amplitude of the sound is too low.The frequency of the sound is too high.The wavelength of the sound is too long.
Use the information to answer the question. Over the last 150 years, the use of fossil fuels has increased, resulting in more carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some scientists think that these atmospheric gases will result in global warming. Scientists have recorded data on global temperature changes and have predicted possible changes in sea level that may affect Maryland residents. Which action helps reduce global warming?developing highwaysdriving large vehiclesusing renewable power sourcesusing electricity from coal burning power plants
As members of a food web, humans are considered to beproducers.consumers.decomposers.scavengers.
Which of the following statements best describes the role of gravity in the formation of stars?Gravity converts solid matter into gases and light energy.Gravity causes gases and dust particles to condense into spheres.Gravity cools gases and liquids until they become one solid mass.Gravity pushes rocks and dust particles outward from a dense center.
What is the name of the process in which igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks are converted into one another in stages?rock cycleerosion cyclemagma cycletectonic cycle
What is happening when rocks are broken down by both physical and chemical changes?weatheringdepositioncondensationdecomposing
In a laboratory procedure, students added sodium hydroxide crystals to a beaker of water and allowed the resulting solution to cool. Based on this information, which type of chemical process most likely occurred?electricalenergeticexothermicendothermic
Students are attempting to make a doorbell ring using some wire and a battery. What is needed to make the bell ring?frictiongravitya convection currentan electrical circuit
Which concept was most likely modified due to the invention of the microscope?size of subatomic particlescomposition of living thingsnumber of the moons of Jupiterformation of sedimentary rocks
Which energy transformation occurs during active transport in a cell?light energy -> chemical energykinetic energy -> potential energychemical energy -> mechanical energymechanical energy -> electrical energy
The nervous system consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves that run throughout the entire body. Which of these is one function of the nervous system?supports body posturecontrols body functionssupplies the blood with oxygencarries blood to and from the heart
Which of these is most likely a result of using pesticides on farm crops?rainfall levels could decreaseair temperatures could increasewater sources could become pollutedcaterpillars could become extinct
The biological selection of a particular allele for a trait to be passed to offspring has nothing do with the selection of the allele for another trait. Which of the following supports this statement?law of independent assortmentlaw of dominancelaw of segregationlaw of recessiveness
Air pollution can influence a person's quality of life. Which best identifies the influence of air pollution?It is a behavioral influence.It is a genetic influence.It is an environmental influence.It is a dietary influence.
What information about stars can be learned by using a spectrometer?chemical compositiondistance from Earthsizespeed
Which is the function of the gallbladder?store bileproduce bilestore digestive enzymesproduce digestive enzymes
When trees are removed from a tropical rain forest, other plants and animals are affected. Which statement identifies another change that will most likely occur when a rain forest habitat is destroyed?Oxygen levels will increase.Carbon dioxide levels will increase.The temperature of Earth will decrease.The air pollution in the atmosphere will decrease.
A student was given the volume and description of a substance and was asked to determine its density. What information is missing?sizemassboiling pointmelting point
A geologist found several types of seashell fossils in a rock layer. Which is the best conclusion about the rock layer?The rock was once buried under a swamp.Water from a river washed across the rock.The rock was once sediment at the bottom of an ocean.Migrating animals dropped the seashell into the rock.
All of the planets in the solar system formed at about the same time from a large cloud of gas and dust. How is Earth different from other planets in the solar system?Earth has no natural satellites.Earth's atmosphere is composed of gases.Water is found in all three phases on Earth.Volcanoes release liquid rock onto Earth's surface.
When light reflects off certain crystals in the atmosphere, effects called halos appear. Which substance in the atmosphere forms these crystals?carbon dioxideoxygensulfur dioxidewater
During which process do animals increase in size?breathinggrowingsheddingrepairing
In what form do plants store the energy produced from sunlight?radiantthermalchemicalmechanical
Carmine's mother drinks four cans of soft drink each day. After drinking the soft drinks, Carmine's mother shouldthrow the cans in the trash.send the cans to a landfill.take the cans to be recycled.crush the cans before putting them in the trash.
A student observes different characteristics of a rock. Which observation best describes a fact about the rock?It has a nice surface.It has an interesting shape.It is made of several layers.It feels warm when touched.
Xylem cells have very thick walls. They make up most of a tree trunk and its branches. What system in vertebrates provides the same function as the xylem cells in a tree?the skeletal systemthe endocrine systemthe respiratory systemthe integumentary system
At one station in a production line, a worker must drill a hole in each end of wooden boards. At the next station, another worker attaches two of the boards together using metal fasteners that fit in the holes. Which of the following processes will ensure that the wooden boards fit together with the fewest errors?placing the parts on a conveyor belt to keep them moving quicklyusing a fixture to hold the boards in place as the holes are drilledinspecting the boards after they are attached to each otherinstalling equipment to protect workers from debris
A student places a ball on the ground and kicks it. The ball moves along the ground. Why does the ball move?The kick decreases the weight of the ball.The kick applies a contact force to the ball.The kick decreases the force of gravity acting on the ball.The kick removes friction between the ball and the ground.
Why do identical twins usually look like each other?They were born on the same day.They have the same kinds of interests.They inherited the same characteristics from their parents.They were taught the same kinds of things at home.
The process by which information is encoded, transmitted, stored, decoded, and retrieved is calledmanufacturing technology.transportation technology.construction technology.communication technology.
Elements are organized on the periodic table according toelectronegativity values.atomic mass.atomic number.the number of neutrons.
Chromium is characterized by a very high melting point. Use the Periodic Table of the Elements to identify which of these elements most likely has a similar melting point.potassiummanganesebrominekrypton
A scientist finds a plant and states that it is a new species. Which is the best way to verify that it is a new species?develop a theory about the plantcompare the plant to other plantsobserve the plant with a microscopedetermine the best growing conditions for the plant
The bottom of the space shuttle is covered with ceramic tile. This material was chosen because it withstandsmoisture.vibration.heat.light.
What is the effect of absorption of infrared light by human skin?sunburn on the skin surfacedisinfection of the skin tissuesfeeling of warmth on the skinimmediate death of skin cells
Some plants need to be in an environment where water drains easily. Which type of soil content will best benefit these plants?sandshaleclaysilt
Which of the following statements best describes sandy soils?Sandy soils allow water to drain quickly.Sandy soils easily break down into clay sediments.Sandy soils hold plant roots tightly in place to prevent erosion.Sandy soils have high levels of decomposed plant and animal matter.
What type of rock was the fossil most likely found in?igneousvolcanicsedimentarymetamorphic
Which source produces light from nuclear energy?the Suna stove burnerthe Moona light bulb
A student rolls a ball on the ground. Which of these causes the ball to slow down and then stop?The motion of the ballThe speed of the ballFriction from the groundA magnetic field
In the human body, the circulatory system works with the respiratory system byproducing red blood cells.transporting oxygen to organs.providing nutrients to muscles.controlling the movement of the lungs.
What kind of force do brakes use to stop a moving bicycle?gravityfrictionmagneticpush
The first powerful telescopes were built during the early 1600s. Scientists at that time were able to learn more about which subject by using the telescope?the shape of continents of Earththe effect of storms and hurricanesforces changing the surface of Earthplanets and moons in the solar system
A student wants to perform an experiment to determine what temperature is best for growing tomato plants. Which is the best piece of equipment to use in this experiment to measure the independent variable?rain gaugelight metertape measurethermometer
Glaciers are slow-moving sheets of ice found on land. What process occurs when glacial ice is heated to 5° Celsius?evaporationfreezingmeltingprecipitation
Land subsidence (ground level dropping) is most likely an indication thatsediments are being deposited.water is being polluted.rocks are being weathered.ground water is being depleted.
The United States government limits the use of certain pesticides through laws passed in the Endangered Species Protection Program. Which is the most likely reason to enforce laws that limit pesticide use?Some pesticides are expensive.Some pesticides fail to control insects.Some pesticides give off foul odors.Some pesticides can harm non-targeted species.
Refrigerators were invented to keep food cold. This is helpful ingrowing food.cleaning food.keeping food dry.keeping food fresh.
What safety procedure should a student follow when a thermometer is broken during a lab experiment?tell the teacher immediatelystop the experiment immediatelysweep the glass into a biohazard containeruse a paper towel to pick up the pieces
Which process is most effective for separating sodium chloride from a saltwater solution?filtrationevaporationmagnetic separationchemical separation
Clear cutting of old growth forests in Oregon provides lumber for housing. In the process of clear cutting, plant diversity decreases and some organisms are pushed to extinction. Clear cutting is an example ofa change in aquatic conditions.a change in societal conditions.a change in atmospheric conditions.a change in environmental conditions.
El Niño is a term that refers to the oceanic phenomenon in which the surface water temperatures increase. The increase in water temperature usually occurs in the tropical Pacific Ocean. Which will most likely occur as a result of this phenomenon to cause environmental changes?melting of the polar ice capsvaried atmospheric conditionsan increase in volcanic eruptionsan increase in the length of summers
An animal that has thick fur, webbed feet, and blubber would probably live in theArctic Ocean.Amazon Rain Forest.Intracoastal Waterway, Florida.Mojave Desert, California.
The rover Spirit is a robotic probe that NASA has placed on Mars. The gravitational attraction of Mars is approximately 62% less than that of Earth. Compared to its measurements on Earth, on Mars the probe hasthe same weight and the same mass.a larger weight, but smaller mass.a smaller mass and larger weight.a smaller weight and the same mass.
Sal is looking at a map of Massachusetts. He has measured the distance, in inches, from Boston to Salem on the map. He wants to know how many actual miles the inches represent. What feature of the map should he look for?keyscalelegendcompass
A hammer and a screwdriver are next to each other in the sunlight. After one hour, the hammer is hotter than the screwdriver. The shape and mass of each object may affect the amount of heat each object gains. Another explanation for the difference in temperature may be that the hammer and screwdriver aremoving at different rates.made of different materials.used for different purposes.picked up in different ways.
On January 15th, there were 10 hours and 24 minutes of daylight in Jacksonville, Florida. On the same day, there were only 9 hours and 37 minutes of daylight in New York City. Why did New York have fewer hours of daylight than Florida?because Earth rotatesbecause Earth tilts on its axisbecause gravity pulls Earth toward the Sunbecause the Moon reflects sunlight onto Earth
A euglena has a flagellum and a paramecium has cilia. Both types of organelles help these organisms move through the water. However, a paramecium can also use its cilia to perform another task. What is this task?obtain fooddefend the cellattach to a surfaceperform conjugation
Which characteristic of wolves is most likely learned?fur coloreyesightlitter sizesocial behavior
Which would most help pollinators find flowers that are pollinated at night?shapecolorsizefragrance
A solar eclipse occurs whenthe Moon blocks the Earth from the Sun.the first four planets in the solar system are aligned.Earth blocks the Moon from the Sun.Earth's shadow falls on the Sun.
Which process turns a large rock into a pile of smaller stones?depositionsedimentationfossilizingweathering
Where are the active volcanoes most likely to be found?where rivers formwhere tectonic plates meetwhere oceans are deepestwhere land and water meet
During its lifetime, a star will evolve through several stages. In which stage does a star spend most of its life?red giantred dwarfwhite dwarfmain sequence
Which of the following elements is best able to combine with itself and hydrogen [H] to form large molecules?sodium [Na]lithium [Li]sulfur [S]carbon [C]
Which of the following is designed to transform an electromagnetic wave into a mechanical wave?a portable radioa television screena computer monitora mercury thermometer
Four students tried to find out which magnet was the strongest. They each shared one idea. Which idea shows scientific thinking?We can pick the longest magnet.We can pick the heaviest magnet.We can measure the strength of the magnets.We can vote for the magnet that we think is the strongest.
Energy is transferred in an electrical circuit throughstatic protons.moving protons.static electrons.moving electrons.
The life cycle of a star includes formation, life, and death. In the Universe, where do new stars originate?from fusion in red giantsin molecular clouds of gasin radiation from black holesfrom large fragments of antimatter
What would be the initial result if a DNA molecule did not replicate accurately?infertility of the organismincorrect protein synthesisincrease in reproduction rateimmediate death of the organism
Photosynthesis and respiration are both parts of which cycle?carbon cyclenitrogen cyclephosphorous cyclerock cycle
Earth is tilted as it travels around the Sun. The tilt changes the amount of energy each area gets from the Sun, which makes some months of the year warmer than others. What are the four main temperature changes in a year called?seasonsclimateweatherquarters
If your hands are cold, you can warm them by rubbing them together. The heat energy that you produce is caused byinsulation.magnetism.friction.conduction.
Large amounts of industrial gases are released into the atmosphere every day. What happens to those gases?They are broken down by ultraviolet light from the Sun.They are converted into nitrogen and oxygen.They rise through the atmosphere and go into outer space.They remain in the atmosphere for long periods of time.
In which way is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell?A prokaryotic cell is larger.A prokaryotic cell has no nucleus.A prokaryotic cell can reproduce itself.A prokaryotic cell has a cell membrane.
What is a primary role of decomposers in an ecosystem?They eliminate matter by taking nitrogen from the ecosystem.They eliminate matter by taking phosphorus from the ecosystem.They cycle matter by returning carbon and other matter to the ecosystem.They cycle matter by returning oxygen and other matter to the ecosystem.
What chemical symbol represents the element copper?CCoCpCu
Meteorologists study weather. Which of the following should meteorologists know about?types of frontstypes of fossilstypes of circuitstypes of adaptations
The crews of two boats at sea can communicate with each other by shouting. Why is it impossible for the crews of two spaceships a similar distance apart in space to do this?The sound is reflected more in space.The pressure is too high inside the spaceships.The spaceships are traveling faster than sound.There is no air in space for the sound to travel through.
Which liquid most likely contains a dissolved gas?whole milkhouse paintmud puddlecarbonated soda
Silica sand is a resource used in large volume in Nevada. This resource is used to make which product?targlassplasticelectricity
Which of these best describes the function of the skeletal system?transports oxygen and nutrients throughout the bodysupports and protects tissues and organsremoves harmful wastes from the cells of the bodybreaks down food into a form that cells can use
A student wants to find out how many different kinds of birds are found in a park. In addition to a bird identification book, the student should use ___.binocularsgogglesa microscopea hand lens
Nevada mines produce greater quantities of a particular resource than any other state. What resource is produced from these mines?zinccoppergoldlead
A student throws a ball. Which of these best describes the moving ball?The ball has light energy.The ball has kinetic energy.The ball is transferring sound energy to the air.The ball is transferring light energy to the air.
During which process does genetic material come from two parents?asexual reproductionphotosynthesisrespirationsexual reproduction
Which of these is a threat to the survival of an ecosystem?predator-prey population cyclesless biomass at higher levels of the food weba shrinking variety of animal and plant speciescompetition among some consumer populations
Which human organ system produces most of the hormones that regulate body functions?digestivenervousmuscularendocrine
The complex, three-dimensional structure of a protein is sensitive to heat because the structure is maintained byhydrogen bonds.covalent bonds.Brownian motion.magnetic fields.
A few types of birds live in the same ecosystem. Which of these characteristics would most likely affect how they compete with each other for food?the types of nests they buildthe lengths of their tailsthe shapes of their beaksthe colors of their feathers
Most of the United States is a part of which tectonic plate?Pacific PlateEurasian PlateNorth American PlateSouth American Plate
At one time, scientists believed that living organisms came from nonliving objects. This theory was revised throughchanges in popular belief.evidence from experiments.information published in books.advances in the scientific method.
The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. What is the primary function of the excretory system?to digest foodto help in defenseto eliminate wasteto enable movement
Which is the best tool for measuring the temperature of lake water?Meter stickBalanceGraduated cylinderThermometer
The teeth of a carnivore are MOSTLY -pointedroundedwideflat
Panels of solar cells are used to collect energy from the Sun and convert it into energy for use in homes. Into what type of energy is the solar energy converted?chemicalelectricalgeothermalhydroelectric
A student wants to estimate the number of dandelion plants growing in a field. He counts the number of plants in a 5 square meter section of the field. What other information should he obtain to make his estimate?the total area of the fieldaverage rainfall in the areaall the organisms living in the fieldenergy and nutrient requirements of dandelions
Overuse of which water resource tends to cause land to subside?ocean wateraquifer waterriver waterlake water
Students are preparing to determine the boiling points of several aqueous solutions. In addition to proper lab attire, what devices or instruments will the students need to conduct this experiment?hot plate, beaker, masking tapethermometer, hot plate, beakermatches, beaker, thermometerbalance, hot plate, thermometer
One solar day on Jupiter lasts only 9 hours and 50 minutes. What causes a solar day?diameter of the planetrotational speed of the planetspeed of a planet in orbit around the sundiameter of the orbit of a planet around the sun
The finest-grained soils are richest insand.humus.clay.iron.
Wind and water are examples of renewable energy sources becausethey will stop producing energy.they were formed millions of years ago.they are always available to produce energy.they take millions of years to start producing energy.
Gregor Mendel contributed to the study of biology by the careful, objective study ofheredity.bacteria.pedigrees.environment.
Which statement describes the most likely effect of transformation on bacteria such as E. coli?Transformed bacteria express a new protein product.Transformed bacteria have multiple chromosomes.Transformed bacteria reproduce more quickly.Transformed bacteria become a new species.
A metal pan will heat up quickly when placed over a gas or electric burner. The metal pan is a goodresistor.insulator.conductor.accelerator.
Which is a fact rather than an opinion about earthquakes?Earthquakes occur along fault lines.Earthquakes are worse than hurricanes.Earthquakes are bad for all local businesses.Earthquakes always cause major damage to homes.
Which statement best describes the development of a human embryo?A single cell becomes many cells.Each cell has a different function.Many cells combine to form one cell.All the cells have the same function.
Which of these natural disasters is least likely to cause major damage to a prairie ecosystem?a flooda tornadoa hurricanean earthquake
The life cycle of a beetle is similar to the butterfly. Which process changes the beetle from larva to adult?moltingmigrationphotosynthesismetamorphosis
Which adaptation helps a bird fly?larger feetbigger eyeslonger beakshollow bones
Scientists are able to correlate time and the amount of difference between homologous genes when studying the divergence of two species because scientists have reliable estimates for which value?rate of genetic mutationssurvival benefit of specific genespressure of selection on base pairsnumber of bases in species' genomes
Which of the following is a part of the process of sexual reproduction?buddingregenerationpollinationfragmentation
Why are diseases transmitted through the bites of infected animals not considered contagious diseases?The infected animals do not show symptoms.The person in direct contact is the only one infected.Humans do not become sick from animal diseases.The diseases are treatable with antibiotics.
Scientists theorize that the original atmosphere of Earth was stripped away by the solar wind shortly after the formation of the planet. The Jovian planets are far enough from the Sun that the solar wind has less of an impact. Studies of the Jovian planets suggest the early atmosphere of Earth was mainly composed of which two gases?oxygen and argonhydrogen and heliumcarbon dioxide and nitrogensulfur dioxide and water vapor
Which human body systems work directly together to allow locomotion?circulatory, excretory, and respiratorycirculatory, endocrine, and reproductiveskeletal, muscular, and nervousskeletal, digestive, and respiratory
Which is the best evidence for the theory of continental drift?the appearance of volcanoes at the boundaries where plates collideearthquakes at boundaries where one plate slides past anothercases where a species exists in only one isolated placefossils of the same species found on widely separated continents
Students go on a field trip to observe salmon spawning in a river. For safety reasons, the students should notexplore alone.listen to instructions.take notes.bring water.
Which of the following involves a learned behavior?laying eggs to reproducehaving hollow, light-weight bonesavoiding insects that taste badhaving white feathers on the throat
Which of the following colors of visible light has the longest wavelength?redbluegreenorange
Which is an example of a form of electrical energy?lightningwindmillradio wavessound waves
Which of the following lists units of length from smallest to largest?light-year, astronomical unit, kilometer, angstromangstrom, kilometer, astronomical unit, light-yearastronomical unit, angstrom, kilometer, light-yearkilometer, angstrom, light-year, astronomical unit
Each layer of Earth has different properties. Which statement best describes the mantle of Earth?The mantle lies below the core.The mantle is composed of hot gases.The mantle lies between the core and the crust.The mantle temperature is lower than the crust temperature.
Which of these is the best example of sexual reproduction?binary fissionbuddingfusing gametesfragmentation
Which of these events during a storm at sea can add oxygen from the atmosphere to ocean water?high windslightningpressure changetemperature change
Which layer of Earth is the thinnest?Inner coreCrustOuter coreMantle
Based on the Periodic Table of the Elements, which of these elements has properties most similar to calcium (Ca)?carbon [C]barium [Ba]sodium [Na]manganese [Mn]
As a river enters a larger body of water, sediments are deposited over a wide area. Which of these landforms is likely to be formed at the site of deposition?CaveMountainDeltaValley
Which of these is a chemical property of a material?densityflammabilitycolorbrittleness
About how long is a lunar cycle?1 day1 week28 days52 weeks
Of the following types of cells, which has the highest concentration of mitochondria?bonemusclenerveskin
What helps skin feel heat and pressure?muscle cellsblood cellsnerve cellsbone cells
Erosion and weathering can both cause changes to the surface of Earth. Which of the following happens only because of erosion and NOT because of weathering?Rocks form deep underground.Rocks become smooth and round.Rocks are broken apart into small pieces.Rocks are moved from one place to another.
Which is an advantage of sexual reproduction in the survival of a population?prevents mutationmaintains genetic diversityreduces the number of genescreates competition between siblings
A species of moth in England has both a light-colored form and a dark-colored form. In the mid-1800s, the percentage of dark-colored moths increased in areas where black soot from factories covered the trees. The soot in these areas has decreased in more recent times as a result of pollution laws. Which of the following statements describes what has most likely happened to the moth populations in these areas?The moth populations went extinct.The moth populations migrated south.The percentage of light-colored moths in the populations decreased.The percentage of dark-colored moths in the populations decreased.
Energy appears in many forms. What form of energy is lightning?electrical energymechanical energymagnetic energysound energy
People take in and release gases from the air when they breathe. Which exhaled gas is a waste product of respiration?oxygenheliumhydrogencarbon dioxide
A unicellular organism is best described as beinga complex organism.a microorganism.an organism with specialized cells.an organism with different types of tissues.
Which of the following best describes how plants use the energy they receive from sunlight?They change water into heat.They produce their own food.They make minerals for their roots.They break down nutrients into rocks.
What can be inferred from a food product advertisement that claims "30% less fat than our leading competitors"?It is a sugar-free product.It will help a person lose weight.It is the healthiest choice available.The fat content of the item is reduced.
Which material is the best conductor of electricity?WoodMetalStonePlastic
A ball is dropped from the top of a tall building. As the ball falls, the upward force of air resistance becomes equal to the downward pull of gravity. When these two forces become equal in magnitude, the ball willflatten due to the forces.fall at a constant speed.continue to speed up.slow to a stop.
Which statement describes an interaction between the hydrosphere and the atmosphere?Flowing water carves through rock to form a canyon.Lava from an underwater volcano cools to form a mountain.Ashes rise from a volcanic eruption to block sunlight.Water vapor rises from the ocean to form clouds.
Often organisms seem similar in their outward appearances. For example, a porpoise and a shark seem closely related, but they are not. Such similarity is the result ofconvergent evolution.adaptive radiation.artificial selection.genetic equilibrium.
A group of frogs live together near a small pond. The frogs compete with each other most for which resource?airinsectsplantssunlight
Which process converts organic nitrogen into an inorganic form that can be used by plants?decompositionsedimentationabsorptionradiation
In animals, female traits are passed down to offspring fromsperm.seeds.pollen.eggs.
The visible light spectrum can be subdivided according tothe types of waves.the sizes of particles.a range of colors.a type of energy.
Three scientists conducted the same experiment to analyze the effectiveness of a cleaning agent on household bacteria. What is the main advantage of having the experiment repeated?More bacteria will be destroyed.The results will be more reliable.A scientific journal will publish their work.The conclusion will lead to new discoveries.
Today, almost all cars have seat belts. How does improving the design of seat belts help people the most?It decreases the cost of cars.It increases the speed at which cars can travel.It decreases injuries to passengers in cars.It increases the comfort of passengers in cars.
Which type of organism is made of one cell?treesbacteriafernfish
At camp, Raj sees a lightning storm. He sees the lightning before he hears the thunder. What does this show?Light moves faster than soundLight moves slower than soundLight and sound move at the same speed
What advantage do the offspring of a dandelion have by reproducing asexually?Reproduction occurs rapidly.Reproductive competition is increased.Mating compatibility improves.Diversity increases between generations.
Which of the following statements best describes a result of using interchangeable parts to manufacture automobiles?The automobiles are identical.The automobiles wear out quickly.The automobiles are difficult to design.The automobiles can be produced on an assembly line.
A stone arch bridge relies primarily on which of the following for its load strength?bendingcompressiontensiontorsion
After a storm, a hospital may have to rely on backup generators to power some equipment. Which is the energy conversion provided by the generators?mechanical energy to electrical energythermal energy to mechanical energynuclear energy to mechanical energythermal energy to electrical energy
Many flowers attract bees. Bees consume nectar from the flower for energy. How does this interaction benefit the plant?by increasing photosynthesisby pollinating itby limiting growthby reducing competition
In living things, traits are passed on from one generation to the next by the transfer ofbloodmineralsCaloriesDNA
Every organism in an ecosystem receives energy from another source. Which of these organisms receives its energy directly from the Sun?deerfungusgrasshawk
Aristotle taught that a force was always required to keep an object moving. Which of the following states what Newton believed?Aristotle was correct.Aristotle was correct for objects on Earth but not in space.An object will keep moving unless an unbalanced force stops it.A moving object will eventually stop even though an unbalanced force keeps pushing on it.
The solar system containing Earth consists of a sun and planets. Which statement best describes the motion of the planets in our solar system?The planets rotate around the sun.The sun rotates around the planets.The planets revolve around the sun.The sun revolves around the planets.
Animal wastes contain bacteria that make organisms sick. These wastes are often washed into water supplies by storms. How might a pet owner prevent these bacteria from polluting water supplies?Brush the pet daily to remove bacteria.Feed pets food that produces less waste.Bag the pet waste and throw it in the trash.Wash the pet with shampoo to kill the bacteria.
Which of the following is performed by the quality control division of a company that is manufacturing a chair?applying the varnishassembling the partscutting the materialinspecting the finish
Which type of storm causes the most flooding in areas located near an ocean coastline?TornadoHurricaneBlizzardFreezing rain
Anne and her father find a 30-million year-old tropical plant fossil in Louisiana. Which question does the fossil help them answer?Were there mountains in Louisiana 30 million years ago?What was the climate like in Louisiana 30 million years ago?Were there earthquakes in Louisiana 30 million years ago?What kind of animals lived in Louisiana 30 million years ago?
In the Four Corners area in the US Southwest, there are large rocky outcroppings of basalt. These were formed by ancient lava flows. Using this information, what class of rock is this?metamorphicsedimentaryigneousweathered
The heath hen, an extinct small wild fowl, was a relative of the prairie chicken. Which of the following most likely caused extinction of the heath hen?overhuntingstable climateplentiful food supplyabundant nesting sites
A stationary air mass over the Gulf of Mexico would typically bewarm and dry.warm and humid.cool and dry.cool and humid.
Which of the following metals will be attracted to a magnet?coppergoldironsilver
A student wants to create a drawing of the water cycle. Which image can the student use to represent water cycling through the atmosphere?a clouda streama frozen lakea drop of dew
Which is made with the help of bacteria?YogurtCreamSoapCooking oil
Lamar learned that birds, mammals, and reptiles are all vertebrates. Which characteristic do all vertebrates share?They all lay eggs.They all have feathers.They all have a backbone.They are all warm-blooded.
Which of these is most likely to create large areas of land subsidence?eruptions of volcanoesextraction of ground waterglobal warminggreenhouse effect
Which of the following best describes two atoms of oxygen that are chemically bonded to each other?moleculecompoundsolutionmixture
If the climate in an area were to become much drier, which plant variation would be most advantageous to the survival of the species?bigger brancheslarger flowersthicker leaveslonger stems
Which form of energy is in firewood?lightsoundkineticpotential
What covers most of the Earth's surface?WaterBare rockFarm landCities and towns
Which tool is best used to observe a soil sample?cameracompasshand lenstelescope
A student walks along a trail by a lake on a cool summer morning. Which statement is an observation the student could make?Fog is rising from the lake.The water is too cold for swimming.The water is cold because it comes from melted snow.The temperature of the air is rising because the Sun is out.
Eating food that is undercooked can lead to a disease that affects the digestive system. Which body part is directly affected by the disease?intestinesarteriesnervessinuses
Which property supports the hypothesis that eukaryotic mitochondria were once prokaryotic organisms?They lack genetic material.They lack a mechanism of motility.They lack internal membrane-bound organelles.They lack a need for proteins in their life functions.
Metals that easily transfer electricity are calledresistors.magnets.insulators.conductors.
Animals and plants need oxygen to live. Oxygen is released in photosynthesis. Which cycle includes photosynthesis?the carbon cyclethe nitrogen cyclethe water cyclethe rock cycle
The Statue of Liberty was built in France and then taken apart into 350 pieces for shipping. When the pieces arrived in New York, the statue was put together. Which statement describes the relationship between the mass of the 350 pieces and the mass of the whole statue?The mass of the pieces is greater than the mass of the statue.The mass of the pieces is the same as the mass of the statue.The mass of the statue is greater than the mass of the pieces.The mass of the statue is not related to the mass of the pieces.
Which statement describes the weather when water droplets in clouds become heavy and the temperature is 20°C (68°F)?It is clear and breezy.It is raining.It is snowing.It is sunny and clear.
Scientists use different tools during their investigations. What tool does a scientist use to study cells?a balancea microscopea centimeter rulera graduated cylinder
Snowy owls live in very cold areas. Which adaptation is most likely a result of living in this type of environment?sharp clawscurved beakslarge, yellow eyesthick, white feathers
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_{3}) will neutralize stomach acid (HCl) in a double replacement reaction as follows: NaHCO_{3} + HCl -> NaCl + CO_{2} + \Box What is the product necessary to make this reaction complete?2HOHO_{2}H_{2}O_{2}H_{2}O
Heat transfer by conduction occurs when moleculesflow as currents through liquidsform waves that travel through spacebecome less dense and risecollide with other molecules
The color of an object such as an apple is the same as the color the light wavesthat travel through the objectthat are absorbed by the objectthat are reflected by the objectthat travel around the object
What causes the tectonic plates of Earth to continually move?convection currents in the mantlevolcanic and seismic activity in the cruststrong winds and stormsrotation of the solid core
Which is the correct order in the process of sedimentary rock formation?compaction, erosion, cementation, depositioncompaction, weathering, erosion, cementationweathering, deposition, cementation, burialweathering, erosion, deposition, compaction
The discovery of tectonic plates and the cause of their movement is best described as a result of which scientific procedure?direct observation of the important properties of the Earth systemcontrolled laboratory experimentation on a simulation of geological systemsmethodical testing of a valid hypothesis statementinquiry into the causes of observed geological phenomena
Cancer is most often the result ofabnormal cell divisionnatural selectionbacterial infectionbiological adaptation
All organisms need food to survive. Which statement best describes the purpose of food for organisms?Food provides skin color.Food provides oxygen for life.Food provides water for energy.Food provides energy for growth.
Soil is important to a forest because the soil ___.stores sunlight in the leavesattracts insects that eat leavesprovides nutrients to the treeswarms the air around the trees
How do muscles and bones work together to create body movement?The muscles pull on the bones.The muscles protect the bones.Muscles grow at the same rate as bones.Muscles send electrical impulses to bones.
Biologists moved a predator from sea level to a higher altitude, where they noticed that the predator became tired more quickly. If this predator had to live at a higher altitude, which adaptation would be necessary for it to survive?increased digestion rategrowth of additional teethreduction of respiration rateproduction of more red blood cells
Ernie made a diagram to model Earth's orbit. What shape is most like what Ernie drew for the orbit?squareovaltrianglerectangle
Classification of galaxies is based on which characteristic?the color of the galaxythe shape of the galaxyhow many stars make up the galaxyhow many planets make up the galaxy
Which physical characteristic of a puppy is most likely inherited from its parents?coat colordesire to play fetchbody weightability to follow commands
A scientist crosses two different varieties of corn to produce a single variety that has traits from both parents. This technique is an example ofcompetitionnatural selectionselective breedingecological succession
A class measures the time it takes for two different trucks to drive across the parking lot. How can they tell which truck is faster?The truck that starts moving first is faster.The truck that takes less time is faster.The truck that has bigger tires is faster.The truck that takes more time is faster.
The fossils of dinosaurs that lived millions of years ago can be found inthe water of oceans.the ice on ponds.the trunks of trees.rocks in the ground.
Which of the following contains salt water?oceansraindropsgroundwaterpolar icecaps
During digestion, fructose is produced by the breakdown of larger molecules. Which type of molecule could be broken down to increase the body's fructose levels?proteinsvitaminstriglyceridescarbohydrates
Which is the most important reason for scientists to publish their data and findings that result from a scientific investigation?to become famousto get paid for their researchto allow other scientists to try to replicate their resultsto gain respect from their peers in the scientific community
Which reflects light?mirrorcameratelescopeeyeglasses
Which of the following is a necessary condition for a lunar eclipse to occur?The Moon must be full.The Moon must be waxing.It must be the beginning of the month.It must be winter in the Northern Hemisphere.
The excessive use of nitrogen-based fertilizers causes runoff that increases the nitrogen content of lakes and bays. These nitrogen compounds directly affect the aquatic ecosystems byinterfering with the water cycle.decreasing the predator population.increasing the rate of algae growth.causing aquatic animals to grow larger.
A blacksmith bends a metal rod into a round wheel. Which statement best describes the wheel?The wheel weighs less than the rod.The wheel weighs more than the rod.The wheel is made of the same substance as the rod.The wheel is made of a different substance than the rod.
Which moon phase occurs approximately 14 days after a full moon?waxing gibbouswaning crescentfirst quarternew moon
After a person eats, the food is converted into energy bymuscles.tissues.bones.cells.
Which statement best describes the primary role of perspiration in humans?Perspiration rids the body of excess water.Perspiration eliminates bacteria from the skin.Perspiration opens skin pores to absorb more oxygen.Perspiration helps to maintain a stable body temperature.
A person produces two sound waves with a flute, one immediately after the other. Both sound waves have the same pitch, but the second one is louder. Which of the following properties is greater for the second sound wave?FrequencyAmplitudeWavelengthSpeed in air
Why is the light year often used to describe distances between objects in the universe?because of the way planets reflect lightbecause of the great number of bright starsbecause of the way objects rotate and revolvebecause of the large distance between objects in space
Which organisms break down dead matter and recycle nutrients back into the ecosystem?grasses and treesrabbits and deerlions and alligatorsmushrooms and bacteria
A student viewing a cell with a microscope observes a cell wall, a cell membrane, and a nucleus. The presence of these structures indicates that the student is looking at a cell from arabbitcarrotwormfly
Which action results in a chemical change?apples being cut into sliceswood burning in a fireplacewet clothes drying on a clotheslinesnow being shoveled off of a sidewalk
What has occurred when bubbles form in a liquid that is being heated?Oxygen is absorbed from the air.Heat is radiating in the liquid.The boiling point has been reached.Molecular stability in the liquid is increasing.
The breakfast that a student ate provided energy for bicycling later in the day. Which energy transformation most likely occurred?radiant to nuclearchemical to nuclearradiant to mechanicalchemical to mechanical
In an experiment, water and salt are mixed together. What is the best way to separate the salt from the water?filter the saltfreeze the mixtureevaporate the waterpour the water out of the container
A metal spoon and a wooden spoon are used to stir a pot of hot soup. After a few minutes, the metal spoon feels hotter than the wooden spoon. What explains this?Metal is always hotter than wood.Metal conducts heat better than wood.Metal conducts electricity better than wood.Metal heats up the water better than the wood.
Materials made of the same substance will have characteristics in common. Which property is most likely to remain constant in different samples of the same material?densitymassshapevolume
Which is Earth's largest source of drinkable water?lakesriversoceansaquifers
Some classrooms have computers. The computer is most useful to the students because it helps themplay games.watch movies.listen to music.find information.
Which of these is an example of something being recycled?Taking glass bottles to a place that makes them into new bottlesUsing the same foil to cover food several timesWrapping glasses with newspaper to put them in a moving boxCarrying lunch to school every day in the same plastic bag
Which of the following is an example of a compound?copperironcarbonwater
One rabbit runs faster than other rabbits in its population. How will the ability to run fast most likely benefit the rabbit?by keeping the rabbit warmer in the winterby helping the rabbit blend with its environmentby allowing the rabbit to find more sources of foodby making it easier for the rabbit to escape from predators
What is the BEST reason for including fruits and leafy vegetables in a healthy diet?They have a high water content.They are the best source of protein.They are rich in minerals and vitamins.They are the best source of carbohydrates.
In one day, a family in a car rode for 2 hours, stopped for 3 hours, and then rode for another 5 hours. During the day, the family traveled a total distance of 400 kilometers. What was their average speed for the whole trip?10 km/h20 km/h40 km/h50 km/h
A Raleigh man turned on his kitchen faucet and filled a glass with water. When he looked at the water, he thought that it might not be safe to drink, so he called the water company to find out. What factor did the man use to evaluate the safety of the water?pHturbiditynitrate concentrationphosphate concentration
Which of these is the main source of the electromagnetic energy we use?batterywindsuncoal
Which of the following is the starting point for a new scientific investigation?identifying experimental variablesforming a question that is the basis of a hypothesisconducting repeated trials and graphing the datawriting out a procedure and collecting the needed equipment
All organisms depend on the transfer of energy to survive. Which best shows the energy transfer between animals in a shoreline ecosystem?Fish -> Plants -> BirdsPlants -> Birds -> FishPlants -> Fish -> BirdsFish -> Birds -> Plants
Which investigation might be used to demonstrate potential energy?Roll one ball toward another, and see what happens when they collide.Place a glass of water in the freezer, and see how long the water takes to become solid.Compress a spring by different amounts, and see how far it can launch a ball into the air.Roll a ball from the top of an inclined plane and determine the amount of time it takes to get to the bottom.
The fossil record shows that trees have changed throughout the years. Which of the following conclusions would be best supported by the fossil record?The environment has changed.Animals need leafy trees.Rocks can destroy trees.Trees give off oxygen.
An agriculturalist predicts that the tomato harvest will be very good this year. Which has the greatest effect on the size of the tomato harvest?the time of day the seeds are plantedthe amount of fruit picked after darkthe type of soil in which the crops are grownthe number of times daily that the farmer observes the crop
A student investigates the effect of temperature on the distance a caterpillar travels in one minute. The student performs the investigation at four different times of day using one caterpillar. This experiment could be improved if the studentuses more than one caterpillar.performs the investigation on a wet surface.uses earthworms instead of caterpillars.performs the investigation at the same time on four days.
A bright object with a long tail of glowing gases is in orbit around the Sun. This object is most likelya planeta staran asteroida comet
A hearing aid is a small device that contains an amplifier, a battery, a microphone, and a speaker. Which part of a hearing aid functions to detect sounds in the user's environment?the amplifierthe batterythe microphonethe speaker
In an experiment studying phototropism, students grew bean plants in labeled cardboard milk cartons. Afterward, the plants and soil were properly discarded. Which instruction line BEST conserves the remaining resources?recycle the markers, reuse the milk cartonsreuse the markers, discard the milk cartonsdiscard the markers, reuse the milk cartonsreuse the markers, recycle the milk cartons
How are electromagnetic waves different from other waves?They have very short wavelengths.They transmit energy instead of matter.They can travel through a vacuum and through matter.They can change direction by reflection when they strike an object.
The Sun releases light and heat energy that cause changes on Earth. How does the Sun's energy change water?The energy makes liquid water freeze.The energy makes water vapor from liquid water.The energy makes clouds release rain.The energy makes water collect into puddles.
In the 18th century, smallpox was a common and deadly disease. A country doctor, Edward Jenner, observed that patients working with cattle who contracted a mild disease called cowpox, never came down with the more serious smallpox. When Jenner obtained liquid from cowpox sores and injected it into healthy patients, they became immune to smallpox. What term best describes Jenner's treatment for smallpox?vaccinationgene therapychemotherapygenetic engineering
What is the name of a circuit in which the current splits at the junctions?closed circuitparallel circuitseries circuitshort circuit
A coach is standing at the finish line of a race. He is holding a stopwatch. What is the coach most likely measuring with the stopwatch?the time of daythe distance of the racethe time it took to run the racethe number of steps taken by the runners
A growing community relies on a nearby lake to provide fresh water for drinking and bathing. An increase in the use of fresh water will cause the lake to becomecolderdeeperlargersmaller
Which of these senses lets Dora know when a skunk has been close to her house?TasteTouchSmellHearing
In 2001, NASA launched a probe to investigate very low-energy radiation emitted when the universe began. What part of the electromagnetic spectrum does this probe observe and record?infraredmicrowaveultravioletvisible
What electrical charge does a proton have in an atom?+2+1-1-2
Work is a product of force and distance. Which of the following is an example of work?sitting at a deskpushing on a wallriding a bikereading a book
All of the different organisms interacting in a pond make upa communitya populationthe water cyclethe habitat
If a lake is polluted, which organisms would most likely accumulate the highest concentration of contaminants?bassminnowsaquatic plantsfish-eating birds
Sand is a type of soil that is made of very tiny pieces of material. Which process most likely forms sand?the rotation of Earththe growth of animalsthe decay of large treesthe weathering of rocks
What is needed to change ice into water?airenergystirringchemicals
Stars form from nebulae of dust and gases. Depending on its properties, a star may become a red, yellow, white, or blue star. Which property determines this star type?agelocationmassshape
Which of these is MOST likely made from only one material?A pencilA bicycleA paper clipA pair of shoes
Francis plugged a toaster into an electric outlet. He put a piece of bread in the toaster and turned the toaster on. While the toaster was on, it changed the electrical energy from the outlet into other forms of energy. Which form of energy toasted the bread?chemicalheatmagneticsound
A student measured liquid with a graduated cylinder. Which of the following units could be used to record the volume of the liquid?poundsmetersgramsmilliliters
Which term is an example of a life process?colorationcamouflagemigrationreproduction
A student divides several cubes into two groups, based on whether or not each cube can float in later. What property is the student using to classify the cubes?weightdensityconductivitymass
Use The Periodic Table of the Elements and the information below to answer the question. Magnesium metal (Mg) is grayish-white in color and reacts actively with water. Fluorine (F2) is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature and is a member of the halogen family. These two elements react to produce magnesium fluoride (MgF2), a chemical commonly used in making windows and lenses. According to the Periodic Table of the Elements, which element is most similar to magnesium (Mg)?calcium (Ca)iodine (I)sodium (Na)sulfur (S)
How do word processors on computers benefit most students?It makes them understand how to write a good story.It helps them gather historical information.It exposes them to data that is hard to find.It allows them to edit papers quickly.
Students observed that a diamond was able to scratch a piece of talc. What does this observation best support?Diamonds have sharp edges.Talc is softer than diamonds.Diamonds are very valuable.Talc and diamonds are both minerals.
Which was a main force driving extensive speciation when the environment became hospitable to life after the Permian mass extinction?increase in available ecological nichesincrease of atmospheric oxygen to present levelsincrease in genetic diversity among surviving organismsincrease in interbreeding between organisms of different species
Some types of bacteria can only live where oxygen is not present. These bacteria were well adapted to life on Earth over 2 billion years ago. Which of the following changes caused many of these bacteria to become extinct?the slow movement of tectonic platesthe varying temperatures of each seasonan increase in volcanic activity under the oceansan increase in the number of photosynthetic organisms
Which two are functions of flowers?attract pollinators and make seedsmake seeds and store foodstore food and take in watertake in water and attract pollinators
When soil becomes saturated during rainfall, excess water begins to collect on the surface. Downslope movement of this excess water to rivers, lakes, and streams is calledrunoff.filtration.groundwater.condensation.
What type of energy is transmitted from the Sun to Earth through space?heat energykinetic energyelectrical energyelectromagnetic energy
What is the cause of rising surface temperatures of the Pacific Ocean, drought in the western United States, and flooding on the Pacific coast of South America?the Gulf Streamthe jet streamLa NiñaEl Niño
Use of nuclear fuel would most likely reduce human contributions to which environmental problem?ozone thinninglandfill creationshoreline erosiongreenhouse heating
What unit of measure should Jerry use to report the volume of a liquid?degrees Celsiuskilogramsmilliliterscentimeters
Use the information below to answer the question. Manufacturing uses many steps to change natural resources into products. Some of these steps change natural resources into industrial materials. These steps are called primary processes. All of the following are primary processes exceptmelting iron ore.producing lumber.molding plastic.crushing rock into gravel.
What part of a communication system converts binary codes in a computer into recognizable characters?decoderencoderreceivertransmitter
Which geologic process occurs when the acid in precipitation dissolves certain types of rock?faultingtiltingweatheringerupting
Water evaporates mostly fromland.snow.clouds.oceans.
Robin compared the properties of some rocks. Which property did she most likely compare with a balance?densitymasstemperaturevolume
Because copper is a metal, it isliquid at room temperaturenonreactive with other substancesa poor conductor of electricitya good conductor of heat
What process makes it possible for the nutrients from organic material to be added to soil?weatheringerosiondecompositionsuccession
Why is it not a safe practice to place a fuel depot over an aquifer?Aquifers are too high up in the mountains.The weight of the depot is too great over the aquifer.The fumes escaping from the fuel depot are explosive.If the fuel leaks, the water in the aquifer will become contaminated.
Look at the equation. 2H_{2} + O_{2} -> 2H_{2}O What does the equation show?heat being added to oxygenhelium mixing with oxygenheat combining with oxygenhydrogen and oxygen combining
Which statement best describes the Law of Superposition?Each sedimentary layer of rock represents 1,000 years of Earth's age, much like the rings of a tree.In undisturbed layers of sedimentary rock, the upper rock layers are older than the lower rock layers.In undisturbed layers of sedimentary rock, the lowest layers contain the older rocks.Rocks that form near volcanoes are older than surrounding rock.
Which object is the best conductor of electricity?glass rodwooden stickplastic strawmetal nail
Green plants get the energy they need to make food fromwaterairsoilsunlight
Which property of a mineral is most likely being tested when it is scratched with a nail?colorhardnesscleavageluster
Ricardo has an igneous rock in his rock collection. Where did this rock most likely form?in a volcanoon a forest flooron a coral reefat the bottom of a river
Animals get energy from eating food that comes from plants. Plants survive by taking in substances that are released by animals. What substance do animals release that plants take in?carbon dioxideoxygensaltsugar
Which factor determines whether precipitation will be in the form of rain or snow?windhumidityair pressuretemperature
Which of these materials transfers heat energy quickest?metalglassplasticwood
Electrical wires are coated with a rubber or plastic because these materials are goodresistors.magnets.insulators.conductors.
An increase in which ecosystem factor could cause a population decline in a bird species?emigrationimmigrationnumber of birthsamount of food
Twentieth-century research and development of vaccines significantly reduced the threat ofpolio.stroke.diabetes.osteoporosis.
The tendency of an element to react chemically is closely related tothe number of valence electrons.the ratio of protons to neutrons.how tightly atoms are packed.the number of neutrons in atoms.
Modern submarines have advanced atmosphere-control systems that enable submarine crews to stay below the surface of the ocean for months at a time. Which of the following also benefits from this technology?architectural designpollution controlfire preventionspace exploration
Which pieces of equipment would be used to measure the density of a solution?a ruler and a protractora magnet and a thermometera graduated cylinder and a balancean Erlenmeyer flask and a Bunsen burner
Gasoline is a nonrenewable energy resource used in most cars and trucks. Gasoline is made from which source?oilhydrogennatural gaswater vapor
The average temperature of Earth's surface has increased approximately 1°C in the past century. Which of the following can best explain this increase in temperature?higher levels of oxygen in the atmospherelower levels of ozone in the atmospherehigher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmospherelower levels of nitrogen in the atmosphere
The Sun is the largest body in the solar system. The Sun is a ___.moonplanetsatellitestar
Which activity is a good health habit?drinking alcoholexercising regularlysleeping only 5 hours dailysmoking cigarettes
The fur of the snowshoe rabbit changes to a lighter color in the winter. This allows the rabbit to blend in with its surroundings. This change is an example ofextinctioncompetitionbiological adaptationecological succession
What does a plant need to make sugar through photosynthesis?soil, water, and oxygenoxygen, sunlight, and soilcarbon dioxide, sunlight, and soilsunlight, water, and carbon dioxide
Some birds fly south in the fall and return in the spring. This is an example ofmigrationcamouflagehibernationgrowth
Which of the following is the best conductor of heat?oven mittsa metal bowla wooden spoonrubber soled shoes
Some processes that shape Earth's surface are slow. Other processes are rapid. Which statement describes a rapid change?Glaciers melt and form rivers.Wind weathers rocks into sand.Earthquakes move land and rocks.Rivers carry sediment and build deltas.
Which characteristic best identifies a pure substance?shapetexturemelting pointstate of matter
Structures in the universe are grouped into large systems, each of which are made up of smaller systems. Which of the following is the largest system of which Earth is only a very small part?Jovian planetsHalley's cometMilky Way galaxyOrion's belt
Which atomic structure has the greatest mass?electronneutronnucleusproton
When European settlers first came to North America, the average thickness of the top layer of soil was approximately 23 cm. Today, the average thickness of the top layer of soil is less than 15 cm. Which of the following factors has most likely had the greatest effect on erosion of the top layer of soil?farmingrestoring wetlandsspecies reintroductionexcessive groundwater use
Which of the following is closest to the percentage of the total water on earth that is freshwater?100%90%70%3%
Most scientists agree that an increase in the amount of greenhouse gases entering Earth's atmosphere causesa decrease in sea levela decrease in average surface temperaturesan increase in melting of polar ice capsan increase in crustal plate movement
Scientists determined that cabbages grown using Fertilizer A grew bigger than cabbages grown using Fertilizer B or no fertilizer at all. The scientists repeated the investigation and produced the same results. Which best explains the purpose of repeating this investigation?to ensure that the cabbages are safe for human consumptionto discover the scientific principle that causes the increased growthto confirm that the observed differences were caused by the fertilizerto determine the difference between the experimental and control groups
When a small group of organisms colonizes a new habitat, the population may be genetically different from the parent population due to differences in allele frequencies. The process responsible for this isnatural selection.disruptive selection.genetic drift.genetic equilibrium.
When conducting a scientific experiment in the field, you are expected tocompletely clear the area.leave the area as you found it.take anything you may need later.destroy specimens once you have observed them.
Which two behaviors best demonstrate stewardship?reducing consumption, recycling wastesincreasing consumption, discarding wastesreducing consumption, discarding wastesincreasing consumption, recycling wastes
Beakers and graduated cylinders are designed to measuremass.density.volume.viscosity.
Iron oxides, such as rust, form when iron metal reacts with oxygen in the air. What are the chemical symbols for the two elements found in iron oxide?I and OIr and OFe and OPb and O
Scientists often use mathematical models and computer simulations to study systems. What is the main advantage of using these techniques for studying the spread of infectious diseases?to reduce the amount of work for all involvedto reduce the cost of conducting experiments on peopleto obtain results quickly in a short period of timeto perform experiments that would be irresponsible using human subjects
Which of these actions causes wind?rotation of Earth on its axismovement of air from water to landuneven heating of Earth's surfaceair passing Earth as it revolves around the Sun
A company wants to make a game that uses a magnet that sticks to a board. Which material should it use for the board?cardboardglasssteelwood
Which sequence has the states of matter listed from least to greatest kinetic energy?solid -> gas -> liquidgas -> liquid -> solidliquid -> solid -> gassolid -> liquid -> gas
A student is given a mixture of gravel and sand and instructed to separate them. Which tool should the student use to best complete this task?a scale and weightsa magneta sievea battery and wire
A container is filled with 100 mL of water and placed in a freezer. The water in the container freezes at 0°C. A second container filled with 90 mL of water is placed in a second freezer. At what temperature does this second container of water freeze?-10°C-1°C0°C10°C
What gas in the air do we need to breathe in order to live?nitrogenoxygencarbon dioxidehydrogenwater vapor
A city is experiencing heavy smog formed by motor vehicle exhaust. Which of these weather conditions contributes most to the formation of smog?dry linecold fronttropical cyclonetemperature inversion
Ocean currents, like the Gulf Stream, affect world climate byspreading plant and animal life over a wider area.ensuring ocean density is not the same globally.carrying sediment from rivers and inland basins.transferring heat to and from various regions.
Jagged mountains would most likely become rounded hills through which process?erosiondepositionvolcanic activitychemical change
While performing an experiment involving four different clear liquids, a student forgets to label the test tubes. What should the student do?try to identify the liquids by smellask another student to identify the liquidsask the teacher how to dispose of the liquidscontinue the experiment with the unidentified liquids
During the light reactions of photosynthesis, energy is stored in the compounds ATP and NADPH. A second set of reactions uses this stored energy to produce vital compounds such as glucose. This second set of reactions involves a biochemical pathway calledthe Calvin cycle.carbon fixation.respiration.transpiration.
What is the relationship between an ecosystem and a community?A community is a very large ecosystem.An ecosystem is a very large community.An ecosystem includes a community and abiotic factors.A community includes an ecosystem and abiotic factors.
Two species of garter snake in the genus Thamnophis originated from a single ancestor. These two species live in the same geographic area, however, one lives in arid land and the other lives in water.Which of the following best identifies the cause of speciation between these two garter snakes?mechanical isolationbehavioral isolationhabitat isolationallopatric isolation
A metal spoon, a wooden spoon, and a plastic spoon are placed in hot water. After 15 seconds, which spoon will feel hottest?The metal spoonThe wooden spoonThe plastic spoonThe three spoons will feel the same.
The bacterium Brucella abortus causes fever in humans. Biologists studying this bacterium found that when exposed to light, the bacterium becomes more virulent. How can this change in virulence most likely be described?as a behavioral adaptationas a survival disadvantageas a response to a stimulusas an acquired characteristic
When iron combines with oxygen in a moist environment, rust forms because of achemical reaction.physical reaction.change in density.change in temperature.
A student counts ants in an ant colony every day at the same time. The student writes the date of observation in one column in a notebook and the number of ants counted on each date in a second column. Which best describes how the student arranged the information?pie chartdata tablebar graphscatterplot
Which human body systems work together to send messages?muscular and skeletalnervous and endocrineexcretory and digestivecirculatory and respiratory
In order for a material to be effective for cooking, it must have which physical property?low melting pointhigh electric chargehigh reactivity with waterlow thermal expansion
Which sequence shows the life cycle of some insects?adult -> pupa -> larva -> eggegg -> pupa -> larva -> adultlarva -> pupa -> egg -> adultegg -> larva -> pupa -> adult
A scientist studied a species of fish. She found that when a certain nutrient was added to the diet of the fish just after hatching, the fish gained an average of 3 kilograms in the first year. What additional information is needed to determine whether the nutrient is affecting the growth of the fish?how much adult fish gained on average when the same nutrient was added to their diethow much newly hatched fish in this species gain in the first year without the nutrient in their diethow much of the nutrient is available for the fish species in their natural surroundingshow much other species of fish gain in the first year when the nutrient is added to their diet
Humans interpret seeing, hearing, tasting, and smelling in thebrainspinal cordreceptorsskin
Dan knows the Earth is tilted 23.5° on its axis. Which is caused because of this tilt?day can become nightdifferent seasons occurlow tide can become high tidethe change in phases of the Moon
Gel electrophoresis is a technology which allows researchers to reliably separate and sort DNA fragments. This technology is most useful for which application?selective breedingmedical gene repairgenetic engineeringcell metabolism analysis
Some sea grasses grow near a group of palm trees on a sandy shore. Which best describes the role of both the palm trees and sea grasses?They get energy from living organisms.They turn decaying matter into nutrients.They provide food for other organisms.They absorb oxygen from the environment.
Students collect pond water in their beakers. Which is the best unit of measurement for the volume of water they collect?GramsMetersMillilitersCentimeters
When tectonic plates move, they can form different landforms. Which is least likely to be associated with the tectonic plate movement that forms volcanoes?hot spotrift valleysubduction zonetransform boundary
The thin layer of rock on Earth's surface is theatmospherehemispherehydrospherelithosphere
Which type of radiation provides astronomers with the most useful information about high-energy events such as stars colliding?gamma radiationinfrared radiationradio wavesvisible light
All of the following are renewable resources exceptminerals.trees.wind.water.
What is the most important property architects must consider when selecting materials for the walls, ceilings, and floors for a new concert hall?thermal propertieschemical propertieselectrical propertiesacoustical properties
Eduardo saw some cats living in an alley. Which of these does a cat need to survive?grass to sleep inlarge trees to climbpredators to chase itsmall animals to eat
A puddle of water on a concrete driveway will disappear after a few hours during a sunny day. Where does the water go as it disappears?It goes into the air.Animals drink it.It soaks into the concrete.It becomes a different substance.
Science students investigated the cause of the different phases of the moon. The model that would best demonstrate the cause of the phases of the moon would include representations ofthe moon and Earththe moon and the sunthe moon, the sun, and Earththe moon, the sun, and Venus
Electrical energy is best described ascoming from the Sun.attracting objects.moving negative charges.developing radiation.
A car and a truck are traveling at the same rate of speed. The vehicles approach a stop sign. Which statement best explains why the car stops in a shorter distance than the truck?The car has a larger mass requiring less force to stop.The car has a smaller mass requiring more force to stop.The truck has a smaller mass requiring less force to stop.The truck has a larger mass requiring more force to stop.
After a rain, a puddle of water remains on a sidewalk. After a day of sunshine, the puddle is gone. Which process is most responsible for the disappearance of the puddle?precipitationtranspirationevaporationcondensation
After which event will primary succession most likely occur?thunderstormcrop harvestvolcanic eruptionurban development
An object moves through space with balanced forces acting on it. Which statement best describes the speed and direction of the object as long as the forces acting on it remain balanced?The speed and direction of the object will both change.The speed and direction of the object will remain constant.The speed will change, but the direction will remain constant.The speed will remain constant, but the direction will change.
About how long does it take Earth to make a complete revolution around the Sun?1 year1 week1 day1 hour
Scientists found trilobite and brachiopod index fossils in cliffs a great distance apart from each other. What can scientists infer about the rocks in which these fossils were found?the age of the rockthe slope of the rockthe density of the rockthe weathering of the rock
Which of the following is a function of the digestive system of the human body?carrying oxygen to the lungssending signals from the brain to the spinal cordbreaking down food into nutrientsproviding support for the body
A person must lift a heavy load of bricks to the top of a building. Which simple machine is best used for this task?a wedgea pulleyan inclined planea wheel and axle
Which form of energy is required for a television set to work?electricalheatlightsolar
The water cycle is important for recycling the water on Earth. Which of these is the source of most of the water vapor in Earth's atmosphere?river floodingglacier meltingocean evaporationplant transpiration
The molecule ATP is composed of elements commonly found in organic molecules. Which of the following is one of these elements?aluminumcalciumphosphorustin
Which energy transformation occurs when a person hits a drum with a drumstick?electrical to lightsound to electricallight to mechanicalmechanical to sound
Which best describes the energy conversion by a household toaster?electrical to heatheat to chemicalelectrical to chemicalheat to mechanical
In late fall, a rabbit's fur grows thicker. This adaptation occurs tokeep the rabbit's body warmkeep the rabbit safe from predatorshelp the rabbit find a matehelp the rabbit find green plants
Many birds avoid eating the viceroy butterfly because it looks like the monarch butterfly. Monarch butterflies contain a substance that makes the birds sick when monarchs are eaten. The development of the pattern of the viceroy butterfly to look like the monarch butterfly is an example ofcamouflage.coloration.diversity.mimicry.
Which difference between water and ice results in ice floating on cold water?heatshapedensityvolume
When buying a sunscreen, which is the best question to keep in mind while reading the label for maximum effectiveness?What is the cost per ounce?Who is the manufacturer?Is the product waterproof?How much protection does it provide?
Which of the following is a description of an organism's development?A sunflower grows toward the Sun.A Venus's-flytrap plant closes its leaves around a fly.An egg hatches, grows into a tadpole and then into a frog.A lizard loses its tail and grows a new one.
Soil that drains slowly most likely has a high amount ofash.sand.clay.peat.
Bile salts play a crucial role in gastrointestinal homeostasis and digestion. Which phrase is the best description of the gastrointestinal function of bile salts?digestion and absorption of proteins in the liverdigestion and absorption of fats in the small intestinedigestion and absorption of carbohydrates in the liverdigestion and absorption of cholesterol in the large intestine
Which type of energy is transferred by vibrational waves?nuclearlightchemicalsound
The process of gene regulation directly impactshow much DNA is stored.how much DNA is replicated.which mRNA is produced.which tRNA is produced.
What is the most important thing a cylinder, a measuring cup, and a beaker all have in common?They all hold liquids.They can all be made of glass.They can all be marked in milliliters.They can all be used to measure the volume of a liquid.
Scientists have shown that clearing the forest in the Amazon for farming is causing the extinction of native species. Which is the most direct cause of extinction from clear-cutting of land?pollutionhabitat lossclimate changeuse of fertilizers
James read that plants benefit animals by changing the atmosphere. How do plants most likely change the atmosphere in a way that is beneficial for animals?Plants release oxygen.Plants absorb sunlight.Plants produce heat energy.Plants make carbon dioxide.
What model is used to show the pattern of traits that are passed from one generation to the next in a family?pedigree chartdichotomous keyenergy pyramidline graph
Tiny droplets of water seen floating in the air can give scientists a clue about the weather. What are groups of these droplets called?hailraina fronta cloud
When taken to a new habitat, non-native plants often threaten native plants of the new habitat. Why do non-native plants threaten native plants?Non-native plants are able to mutate rapidly.Non-native plants cause native animals to relocate.Non-native plants are able to be used for medicine.Non-native plants compete with native plants for resources.
Which technology enables doctors to monitor the function of the heart?dialysis machineelectrocardiogramelectroencephalogramautomatic external defibrillator
Which substance contributes most to the greenhouse effect?wood smokenitrous oxidescarbon dioxidenuclear radiation
A large amount of oil was spilled in a lake environment. Within a few weeks, the number of plants and animals living in the area where the oil was spilled will most likelydecreaseincreaseremain the same
Which explains the relationship between hours of sunlight and seasons?the rotation of Earth on its axisthe tilt of Earth's axis relative to the sunthe location of Earth's orbit in the solar systemthe motion of the moon as it travels around Earth
The temperature of the stratosphere increases with altitude because of the presence ofnitrogen.water vapor.ozone.carbon monoxide.
Which structure refers to a group of specialized cells that all perform the same function?virustissueorgannucleus
Which event occurs only twice each year?lunar eclipsefull moonequinoxlow tide
What would be the phenotype of a cross between a homozygous dominant tall plant and a homozygous recessive short plant?100% tall100% short25% short, 75% tall50% short, 50% tall
Joey is making breakfast and pours a glass of milk over a bowl of dry cereal. Which best describes what Joey made for breakfast?elementcompoundmixturesolution
Scientists determined that specific agents produce specific diseases, and many are transmitted by sneezing. What must the droplets contain for a disease to be transmitted by sneezing?the disease-causing particlescells exposed to the diseasetoxins released by diseased cellsdisease-specific antibodies
Which of the following organisms would most likely get its food energy only from consumers?deergrasshawkmushroom
Coal is a fossil fuel that is formed fromwater eroding the land.meteors hitting Earth.repeated volcanic eruptions.the decay of organic material.
What do birds, bats and butterflies have in common?feathershairinternal skeletonwings
Changes at the molecular level can turn proto-oncogenes into oncogenes. These changes cause unregulated cell division. Which disease is caused by this transformation?diabetesleukemiapneumoniahemophilia
Which characteristic of sound makes it possible for bats to fly in the dark without hitting any objects?refractionreflectionconductionamplification
Students went on a class field trip to Natural Bridge Caverns. They noticed rock formations in the cave called stalactites. Which of these processes caused the stalactites to form?heatpressurefreezingdeposition
A switch that can open or close an electric circuit can be used toincrease the amount of current.reverse the current's direction.stop the current.accelerate the current.
Jesus learned that a space probe named Voyager 1 was launched from Earth in 1977. It will take Voyager 1 more than 500 years to travel 1 light year. What is a light year used to measure in space?distanceenergyforcetime
Scientists think that the rise in global temperature during the last one hundred years is due to an increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Which question would best help scientists assess the claim that humans are responsible for the rising global temperature?What is the mechanism by which carbon dioxide heats Earth?What is the source of most of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?What is the source of the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?What is the increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?
Which structure controls what enters both plant cells and animal cells?nucleuscell wallchloroplastcell membrane
Appearance, texture, and density are classified asphysical properties.chemical properties.magnetic properties.thermal properties.
A student compares a plant cell to an animal cell. Which structure will the student find ONLY in the plant cell?chloroplastnucleusmitochondrioncytoplasm
One hot summer, a grassland experienced a drought. Which most likely happened in the ecosystem during this time?The competition for food among primary consumers increased.Nutrients cycled through the system at a faster rate.Less solar radiation was able to enter the system.Secondary consumers became extinct.
The need for farmland in Brazil has led to the cutting of the rain forests in the Amazon. Cutting trees in the Amazon rain forest might have a global effect bydecreasing the amount of fresh waterincreasing the number of animal speciesdecreasing the average yearly temperaturesincreasing carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
Which two body systems maintain the level of glucose in the blood?nervous and respiratory systemsdigestive and endocrine systemsmuscular and immune systemsskeletal and cardiac systems
A student writes in a laboratory notebook: I placed a piece of iron in a beaker of water and the iron sank to the bottom of the beaker. What the student wrote in the laboratory notebook is an example of a(n)observationpredictioninferencehypothesis
Which series correctly represents the levels of organization in an organism?cells -> organs -> organ system -> tissuecells -> tissue -> organs -> organ systemtissue -> cells -> organ system -> organstissue -> organ system -> cells -> organs
Which is a function of a seed?forming fruitmaking pollenstoring food for a new planttaking in water from the ground
Which process below uses carbon dioxide and the sun's radiant energy to produce chemical energy?EvaporationPhotosynthesisRespirationDecomposition
A serotinous cone is a seed enclosure that requires intense heat to open. When would a population of trees most benefit from having serotinous cones?after a droughtafter a heat waveafter a forest fireafter a tornado
A lumber company plants new trees where a forest once stood. This is an example ofconserving resources.consuming resources.recycling resources.replacing resources.
Some pea plants always have peas with smooth skin. Other pea plants always have peas with wrinkled skin. How can a student best predict which kind of pea will grow from a seed that is planted?by checking the amount of water in the soilby checking how often the pea plant receives sunlightby checking how much space the plant will have to growby checking the type of peas growing on the parent plants
How do plants affect their environment?Plants clean the soil.Plants make sunlight brighter.Plants make food used by other organisms.Plants create water
Which is an example of a physical property of an object?The object bends without breaking.The object bubbles when put into an acid.The object burns when touched by a flame.The object gives off sparks when put into water.
What happens when a warm object is put inside a cooler object?The warm object loses energy and the cool object gains energy so that both objects stay at different temperatures.The warm object gains energy and the cool object loses energy so that both objects stay at different temperatures.The warm object loses energy and the cool object gains energy until both objects are the same temperature.The warm object gains energy and the cool object loses energy until both objects are the same temperature.
Newborn white-tailed deer have hundreds of spots on their coats which gradually disappear at three to four months of age. The spots on their coats make the newborns blend in with the environment throughmimicry.migration.hibernation.camouflage.
What is the smallest particle of an element that still exhibits all the properties of that element?an electronan atoma moleculea proton
A population of tree-climbing lizard lives on one bank of a large river. The other bank of the river is a treeless prairie. During a flood, 40 lizards were transferred to the prairie side of the river. After 200 generations, this transferred population of lizard lost the ability to climb.Which mechanism is most likely responsible for this loss of function within the transferred population?gene flownatural selectiongenetic driftmutation
When a cup of water at room temperature is put in a freezer, the water's state of matter will change fromliquid to gasgas to liquidliquid to solidsolid to liquid
The weight of an object can change because of the force that acts on that object. Which force causes the weight of an object to change?gravitationalelectricalmagneticfriction
Use the information below to answer the question. The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. What is the primary function of the excretory system?to digest foodto help in defenseto eliminate wasteto enable movement
What is the MAJOR cause of acid rain?smelting oreevaporation of polluted waterjet airplane exhaust high in the skysulfur combining with water vapor in the atmosphere
In 1921, Earl Dickson invented a bandage after he noticed his wife was unable to easily cover cuts on her hands. He covered the bandage with a chemical that sealed it so air would not enter the cut. How did solving this problem benefit others medically?People relied on bandages more than doctors.The bandages cured cuts that were infected.The bandages helped keep cuts clean.People cut themselves less often.
Which is a factor that most likely would affect the climate in a particular area?amount of lightningdistance from an oceannumber of earthquakesshape of the shoreline
Pond ecosystems depend on the water cycle to ensure the survival of the animals that live in or near the pond. If a drought reduces the water level, which population of animals would be most affected?duckfishmousesnake
Some plants rely on hummingbirds for pollination. If a deadly disease infected the hummingbird population, what would most likely happen to the plants?They would die within hours.They would become endangered.They would need to migrate.They would grow at a slower rate.
When salt is added to ice, the ice begins to melt because the saltraises the freezing point.lowers the freezing point.raises the boiling point.lowers the boiling point.
Leaf cells are one type of tree cell. Which process occurs in a growing leaf cell?evolutionadaptationsugar productionsexual reproduction
Which diagram correctly shows the flow of energy in a food chain?Decomposer -> Consumer -> ProducerProducer -> Consumer -> DecomposerConsumer -> Producer -> DecomposerProducer -> Decomposer -> Consumer
Which form of energy is produced when paper is burned?heatmagneticelectricalchemical
A group of cells performing the same function in the body is calleda tissue.an organelle.an organism.a system.
Which material is a good conductor of heat?plasticrubberglasscopper
All living organisms have certain needs in order to stay alive. Which is most necessary for both plants and animals?foodwaterchlorophyllcarbon dioxide
Plant leaves have tiny pores. These pores help plants release water from their tissues into thelithosphere.biosphere.hydrosphere.atmosphere.
How can washing your hands help keep you from getting sick?It washes away germs.It makes your hands look nice.It keeps your skin from drying out.It makes your hands warmer.
Which part of a plant makes sugar from carbon dioxide?stemleafrootflower
One method of heat distribution is a baseboard forced hot water system. A baseboard system carries hot water through a pipe that passes through many small, flat plates called fins. What is the purpose of these fins?to dissipate the heat of the hot water flowing through the pipeto prevent the baseboard from coming in contact with hot surfacesto replace the heated air leaving the system with cold airto prevent dust and other particles from entering the baseboard
Aerogels are compounds formed by the drying of certain gels. Although the aerogel hardens into a solid material, the particles in the gel are much farther apart than those of most solids and particles are held together by strong bridges of covalently bonded atoms. Which of the following is a likely property of aerogels?very low densityhigh electrical conductivityvery low melting pointvery flexible
What renewable energy source used to make electricity is thought to be always available?oilcoalwindnuclear
When heat flows from a hot spot to a cooler spot, entropy increases. When heat is forced to flow from a cool spot to a warmer spot, entropy decreases. Marta is looking for something in her house that causes a decrease in entropy. Which of these should she choose?an ice cube meltingthe refrigeratoran egg fryingthe toaster
Which of the following is influenced by both genetics and behavior?eye colorhair textureblood typebody weight
Which of the following natural disasters is likely to cause the most widespread damage in a coastal ecosystem?a landslidea tornadoa tsunamian earthquake
One function of the circulatory system is to carry cellular nutrients to the body. Which part of the circulatory system is responsible for exchanging nutrients and wastes?arteriescapillariesheartveins
How does sedimentary rock form?sediments coolsediments meltsediments separatesediments compress
Which of the following best explains why electrical wires are usually covered with plastic or rubber?to insulate the electrical wireto keep the electrical wire warmto make the electrical wire strongerto make the electrical wire more flexible
The Moon revolves around Earth about once everyday.year.week.month.
Calcium is a mineral that helps make your bones and teeth strong. Which of these foods is the best source of calcium?candyricecheesemeat
According to the endosymbiotic theory, the outer membrane of the chloroplast originated from which organelle?the lysosome of an engulfed prokaryotic cellthe chloroplast of an engulfed prokaryotic cellthe cell membrane of an eukaryotic host cellthe chloroplast of an eukaryotic host cell
Students performing a scientific investigation are most likely trying toproduce a new theory.disprove a hypothesis.reject a conclusion.answer a question.
Which statement describes a function of bones in mammals such as dogs and horses?Bones provide protection for organs in the body.Bones send messages to the brain to move the muscles.Bones carry oxygen-rich blood throughout the body.Bones connect the brain and the spinal cord.
To a person standing motionless on the Earth's surface on a day with no wind, in which direction would the rain appear to fall?verticallydiagonallyhorizontallycircularly
Which two things interact most in the water cycle?oceans and the Moonoceans and the Sunlakes and the Moonlakes and the Sun
Some animals have advantages and disadvantages because they are different. Which of the following has a disadvantage compared to other animals in its population?a polar bear that has dark-colored fura deer with long legsa rabbit that can run fasta hummingbird with a long beak
Which is a characteristic of both plants and animals?life cycleslearned behaviorsproduce their own foodreproduce using seeds
What is the main difference between planets and moons in our solar system?All planets can support life; moons cannot.All planets have atmospheres; moons do not.All planets orbit the Sun; all moons orbit planets.All planets are larger than all moons.
Which is a response of the autonomic nervous system that helps maintain equilibrium in the body?shivering in cold temperatureseating due to appetiteslapping at biting insectspulling away from hot objects
Maria Mitchell discovered a comet in 1847 that was later named after her. Maria Mitchell's discovery contributed to which branch of science?biologychemistrygeologyastronomy
When a lightbulb is lit, electrical energy is changed into light energy andchemical energymagnetic energyheat energymechanical energy
Water moves directly from a lake to the air by which of the following processes?condensationevaporationprecipitationsedimentation
In the late 1700s, Antoine Lavoisier performed a series of experiments to find out what happened when a substance burned. In each experiment, he observed that the weight of a container and its contents was the same at the end of the experiment as it had been in the beginning. These observations led him to propose the law ofcombustion.fixed proportions.conservation of mass.conservation of energy.
A student has a mineral sample. He wonders if the sample is the mineral mica. He knows the cleavage pattern of mica is a smooth, flat sheet. The student can best find out the cleavage pattern of the sample byshining a light on the mineral.soaking the mineral in water.rubbing a penny against the mineral.breaking off a piece of the mineral.
A full Moon is observed in Buffalo, New York, on June 1. Approximately when will the next full Moon be observed in Buffalo?June 7June 15July 1July 7
A computer model of an insect population takes into account the following parameters: * available food resources * annual temperature variation * timing of insect reproductive cycles Which additional parameter would most significantly improve the model's accuracy when predicting the insect population size?decomposers recycling dead insectsannual variation in oxygen availabilityactivities of predators preying on insectsvariation in barometric pressure
Many insects go through metamorphosis. Which series shows the stages of complete metamorphosis correctly?egg, nymph, pupa, adultegg, larva, nymph, adultegg, nymph 1, nymph 2, adultegg, larva, pupa, adult
Which of these describes rotation?Mercury goes around the Sun every 88 days.The Moon goes around Earth every 28 days.Earth orbits the Sun about every 365 days.Earth makes one turn on its axis every 24 hours.
Sam looks into a fish pond and points at a goldfish. Sam's grandfather looks where Sam is pointing and tells Sam that the fish is actually in a different location. Which property of light explains why Sam's grandfather is correct?reflectionrefractiondiffractionabsorption
People sitting around a campfire are able to feel the heat from the fire. How are the people able to feel the heat from the fire without touching the fire?The heat from the fire travels through the ground and heats the ground around the people.The heat from the fire is conducted through air molecules to the people.The heat from the fire rises in the air and then settles around the people.The heat from the fire radiates from the fire to the people.
In which case does a physical change occur?Ice melts into water.Bread burns in a toaster.A cake bakes in an oven.Two chemicals form a new substance.
Which energy source could involve a dam?biomasssolar powergeothermal energyhydroelectric power
Which cellular structure do organisms in the kingdoms Eubacteria, Archaebacteria, and Protista have in common?a nucleusa cell membranea circular chromosomea mitochondrion
Sheri went on a field trip with her class and saw a stream with floating garbage. How could this pollution affect humans?There may not be enough drinking water.There may not be enough water in the water cycle.There may not be enough oxygen for humans to breathe.
Which information would probably be most helpful to someone trying to identify a mineral sample?location and mass of the sampleshape and texture of the samplehardness and streak of the samplecolor and size of the sample
Which of these is most likely an effect of releasing carbon dioxide pollution into the atmosphere?a reduction in the ozone layera reduction in photosynthesisan increase in radioactive wastesan increase in the greenhouse effect
Plastic conducts very little thermal energy or electricity. Because of this property, plastic would most likely be used to covermetal.wood.solids.liquids.
Which unit of measurement do astronomers use when measuring the distance between two stars found in the Milky Way?meterlight-yearkilometerastronomical unit
The human body is made up of several systems. The mouth, esophagus, and stomach are all parts of which system?circulatorydigestivenervousskeletal
Which term describes the path the Moon travels around Earth?rotationdayorbitphase
Which best describes an exothermic reaction?a physical change occursequal amounts of products are producedenergy is requiredenergy is released
During freezing, melting, and boiling, water changes from one state to another state. Heat needs to be supplied for which of these to take place?boiling onlymelting onlymelting and freezing but not boilingmelting and boiling but not freezing
Which of the following is a first-level consumer?wolfhawkcarrotrabbit
A force of 5 N is required to increase the speed of a box from a rate of 1.0 m/s to 3.0 m/s within 5 s along a level surface. What change would most likely require additional force to produce the same results?reduce the mass of the boxincrease the mass of the boxmake the surfaces of the box smoothmake the surface of the floor smooth
What is the MAJOR reason Earth has seasons?Earth has a moonEarth has a tilted axisEarth has a magnetic fieldEarth has an elliptical orbit
In a particular habitat, Animal X has two sources of food. One source is found in the water and the other source is found on land. If the main predator of Animal X is found only on land, what is the most likely structural adaptation that will be selected for in the population of Animal X?development of clawsincrease in leg strengthincrease in visual acuitydevelopment of webbed feet
A teacher uses an instrument that records decibel levels. What is the teacher measuring?noise levelsintensity of lightrelative humiditytypes of thermal energy
Which best explains how nutrients get into soil?through exposure to airby absorbing sunlightthrough decaying matterby rocks eroding
Lichens grow on rocks and produce an acid that reacts with part of the rock, forming soil. Which best describes the action of lichens on the rocks?erosionfertilizerchemical weatheringmechanical weathering
Why do the Sun and Moon appear to move across the sky?The rotation of the solar system makes the Sun and Moon seem to move.The rotation of Earth makes the Sun and Moon seem to move.The Sun and Moon revolve around Earth.Earth revolves around the Sun and the Moon.
Which human activity would have the greatest positive impact on the water quality of a stream?releasing warm water into the streamdriving cars through the streamreducing use of fertilizers near the streamincreasing use of chemicals near the stream
A student pours water into a cup and places the cup in a freezer. After many hours, the water will change fromsolid to gassolid to liquidliquid to solidliquid to gas
Which gas is given off by a plant during photosynthesis?oxygennitrogenhydrogencarbon dioxide
Which of the following processes makes it possible for plants to use energy from sunlight to produce their own food?metamorphosisphotosynthesispollinationreproduction
Which protist has starch granules in its cytoplasm?amoebaeuglenaparameciumvolvox
Which resource is more available due to improvements in deep-sea drilling technology?crude oilfresh waterthermal energysalt reserves
Tooth decay is an infection that causes deterioration of the protective enamel on teeth, resulting in damage. Tooth decay is most likely caused bybacteria.acidic food.allergies.genetic defects.
Which structure do a rabbit cell and a bacillus cell have in common?mitochondrioncapsulenucleusDNA
Which of these is necessary for life on Earth?watertreeswindsoil
During a collision, a seat belt slows the speed of a crash dummy. What is the direction of the net force exerted by the seat belt compared to the direction of the crash dummy's motion?in the same directionin a vertical directionin a downward directionin the opposite direction
By inserting a gene into crop plants, scientists have developed plants that are resistant to insects. If an insect eats the plant, the insect dies. Which practice is unnecessary with this new plant variety?eroding the land by tillingoverproducing food cropsremoving weeds from cropsspraying plants with pesticides
As wood in a campfire burns, it releases heat and becomes ash. What kind of change occurs in the wood when it burns and releases heat?nuclearmagneticchemicalmechanical
Which statement is an inference?A thermometer shows that the air temperature is 56°F.A mineral sample of galena produced a gray-black streak when tested.Based on previous data, ten hurricanes may occur in the year 2013.A weather vane indicates the wind is coming from the west.
Which process moves water from the oceans to the atmosphere?condensationtranspirationevaporationprecipitation
At concentrations of 0.1-1 µg/ml colchicine, a natural plant product, can cause the mitotic arrest of dividing cells at metaphase through disrupting the spindle apparatus. Colchicine interferes with which of these cell functions during cell division?microtubule organization of spindle fibersDNA synthesis of spindle proteinmembrane transport of spindle fibersRNA synthesis of spindle protein
Most species of ducks have webbed feet. The webbed feet are an example ofbehavioral trait.a learned trait.an inherited trait.an instinctive trait.
On which date does North America usually experience the longest period of daylight?March 21June 21September 21December 21
What causes an object to fall to the ground when you let it drop from your hand?magnetismgravityair resistancethe push from your hand
The phases of the Moon are caused by thetilt of the Earth.tilt of the Moon.revolution of the Earth around the Sun.revolution of the Moon around the Earth.
One system of the human body works along with the skeletal system by assisting movement and maintaining posture. Which system is being described?respiratorycirculatorymusculardigestive
The discovery of penicillin helped in thetreatment of infections.healing of bones.discovery of viruses.search for diseases.
When the environment changes more quickly than a species can adapt, the species may becomeextinctdominantdiverseoverpopulated
A student hears on the radio that the outside temperature is 32°C. What type of weather will the student most likely expect when she steps outside?cool, rainy fall weathercold, snowy winter weatherhot, sunny summer weatherspring weather with flowers blooming
Which parts of an atom are reactive during a chemical process?electronsprotonsneutronsmolecules
What is one way people are helping the environment?They are planting trees to replace the ones that are cut.They are building more roads so more people can see natural areas.They are building more dumps to hold the trash we create.They are using their cars more to get to places faster.
What is the function of hollow bones in birds?to streamline birds for efficient flightto reduce the weight of birds for flightto store oxygen for high-altitude flightto make bones strong enough for flight
A screwdriver is used to pry the lid off a paint can. The resistance arm is 0.5 centimeters. The effort arm is 20 centimeters. What is the mechanical advantage of the screwdriver?0.0251019.540
Food provides calories needed by the body for energy. However, the body must use energy between meals when food is not consumed. What is the most likely response of the body when more energy is used than the calories consumed provide?to increase blood flow to the limbs for energy productionto release energy from lipids stored throughout the bodyto transform stored proteins into carbohydrates for energyto contract muscles to create heat energy for the body
The climate of an area would be expected to have the least fluctuations in temperatures where theatmospheric nitrogen is low.vegetation is sparse.days are longest.humidity is high.
Why would animals most likely have to leave an area during a drought?to find matesto find shelterto escape predatorsto find water and food
Secondary pollutants are produced in the environment by chemical reactions involving primary or emitted chemicals. Which of the following is a secondary pollutant?carbon monoxide (CO)nitrogen oxide (NO)methane (CH_{4})ozone (O_{3})
The human brain is an organ that is made up of many tissues. This information can be used to determine that the brain isunicellular.multicellular.part of a bacterial colony.able to function independently.
A bicyclist rides on a flat road and then stops pedaling but does not apply the brakes. The bicycle stops because of ___.balancefrictionattractionmagnetism
One student rubs a balloon against his hair several times. Another student passes a comb through her hair several times. The students place the comb near the balloon and observe that the comb repels the balloon. Which is the most likely reason the comb is able to repel the balloon?The balloon has a positive charge and the comb is neutral.The balloon and the comb have the same electrical charge.The balloon has a negative charge and the comb is neutral.The balloon and the comb have opposite electrical charges.
How is weather related to climate?Climate is the long-term average of a region's weather.Climate describes the weather of a large area.Weather is the long-term average of a region's climate.Weather describes the climate of a large area.
Katie has a mixture of iron filings and sand. She wants to separate them. How can she do this?Shake the mixture, and the iron filings will rise to the surface.Add water to the mixture, and the sand will dissolve in the water.Put the mixture through a sieve, and the sand will remain in the sieve.Pass a magnet over the mixture, and the magnet will attract the iron fillings.
Which process is common to most living things?flyingtalkingseeingreproducing
The angle of a ramp is changed several times during an experiment. Which tool is needed to measure the different angles?compassprotractormeter stickspring scale
All of these are examples of observation and measurement exceptcharting where birds fly.attracting birds with birdseed.counting the number of birds that fly by.illustrating the different birds that fly by.
The piping plover is a bird that builds its nest on sand dunes along the Atlantic Ocean. Which of these actions most likely damages the nests of the piping plover?people fishing from a boatchildren playing in the ocean waveschildren digging holes along the sand dunespeople walking on a sidewalk along the sand dunes
Which is an effect that cities have on the weather?Small numbers of plants cause rain to fall more often.Large numbers of houses cause the wind to be stronger.Small areas of open water cause fog to be more common.Large areas of pavement cause the temperature to be hotter.
A "shooting star" isa comet.a meteor.an asteroid.a small star.
Which type of organism converts wastes and dead materials into nutrients that can be used by plants?carnivoreherbivoredecomposerproducer
Biochemical reactions that require high temperatures to proceed are able to take place at body temperature within the cells of living organisms. Which factor is mainly responsible for allowing biochemical reactions to proceed at body temperature?The cellular enzymes act as catalysts.The small size of cells keeps reactants together.The pH of the cytoplasm increases reaction rate.The reactants are present in small quantities in the cell.
Which statement best compares gravity on the Moon to gravity on Earth?Gravity on the Moon is greater because it is closer to the Sun.Gravity on the Moon is less because it is smaller than the Earth.Gravity on the Moon is less because it has less atmosphere than the Earth.Gravity on the Moon is greater because it has less mass than the Earth.
An enclosed 20 mL metal cylinder was filled with a gas sample at room temperature. The sample then was transferred to an empty 40 mL enclosed container, also at room temperature. After being transferred, the volume of the gas was10 mL.20 mL.30 mL.40 mL.
Melting, boiling, and freezing are examples ofphysical changes.chemical changes.magnetic changes.electrical changes.
There is a shadow under a tree. Which form of energy must be present for the shadow to occur?heatlightsoundmechanical
Seismometers measure quick changes that happen in the crust of our planet. Which of the following is a seismometer used to measure?earthquakeerosionfloodingweathering
In some lakes, excessive blooms of algae appear when human activity causes degradation of water quality resulting in conditions more favorable for algae growth. Which human activity primarily causes this problem?miningfarmingtransportationmanufacturing
Drake has started a garden. What can Drake do to enrich the soil so that his plants will grow better?remove earthwormsadd more water to the soilincrease the amount of pesticide he usesmix decomposed plant matter into the soil
Which of these objects will rust?wood chipsplastic strawsiron nailsglass beads
Which color baseball cap would absorb the most light on a sunny day?pinkblackwhiteyellow
Which body systems are most involved in the response when someone stubs his or her toe?nervous and musclemuscle and endocrinenervous and digestivereproductive and circulatory
Which part of a sound wave measures loudness?wavelengthmagnitudeamplitudefrequency
Neurons respond to stimuli and transmit impulses to coordinate body functions. Which of these indicates the rapid change in the membrane potential when a neuron is stimulated?action potentialresting potentialrefractory periodthreshold period
Materials that let electrons flow very easily from one atom to anotherare called insulators.are called conductors.are called non-metals.are called resistors.
Which is the most important safety measure to follow when using an acid in a classroom laboratory?wearing protective clothing and goggleskeeping the window openclosing the door to the hallusing bright fluorescent lights
In a deep valley on Earth, a person shouting will hear an echo as the sound is reflected back off the surrounding mountains. In a similar valley on the Moon, no echo will be heard. This is becausethe gravitational pull on the Moon is too lowthe temperature on the Moon is too lowthere is no air on the Moon for the sound to travel throughthe mountains on the Moon cannot reflect sound
The motion of a car accelerating in a straight line differs from the motion of a car moving in a straight line at a constant speed. Which change best describes acceleration of a car?a change in the direction of the cara change in the distance the car travelsthe change in velocity divided by the time for that changethe change in the time for the car to travel a distance
During which time of day are the highest temperatures most often recorded?sunsetafternoonsunrisenight
When butterfly eggs hatch, the young are called ___.wormscocoonscaterpillarslittle butterflies
Louis Pasteur's work in the nineteenth century on pasteurization greatly improvedthe quality of food.the prediction of weather.the availability of medication.the effectiveness of vaccinations.
An earthworm was placed on top of a thick layer of moist topsoil in a pan. The pan was placed in a room with the lights on. How did the earthworm most likely respond to these conditions?by burrowing under the soilby crawling around in the panby staying where it was placedby trying to crawl out of the pan
What is the liquid layer of Earth that lies beneath the mantle?inner coreouter coremesosphereasthenosphere
Many natural resources are found in Maryland and the surrounding area. Some of these natural resources are renewable and some are nonrenewable. People use both kinds of resources in daily activities. Using natural resources often produces waste products. Burning fossil fuels, such as oil, coal, and gasoline produces pollution. Which type of pollution is most often produced by burning fossil fuels?air pollutionland pollutionnoise pollutionwater pollution
When a bird sings, it is most likely singing in order tofrighten away other types of birdsmark the bird's territory against the same type of birdattract insectswake up other animals
Coal is used for generating about 53% of the electrical energy in the United States. Which of these environmental issues is directly contributed to by the burning of coal?beach erosionozone depletionoverfishingair pollution
Which term correctly describes all of the following materials? salt water, vinegar, bronze, air, beach sandcompoundsmixturessolutionselements
Isle Royale is a large island in Lake Superior. During the 1800s, most of the trees were removed, and the wolves and moose that lived on the island died. In the early 1900s, moose were reintroduced to the island. By 1925, the moose population on Isle Royale rose to about 2,000 individuals. Which best explains how the moose population grew so rapidly?The death rate was greater than the birth rate.There was unlimited food for the moose to eat.The birth rate was constant and few moose died.There were no predators to control the population.
Which is a characteristic Earth and the Moon have in common?seascratersthunderstormsatmosphere
As Bobby entered a dark room, he pushed the switch on the wall to turn on the light. What makes the light turn on when Bobby pushes the switch?electricityfrictiongravitymagnetism
Which human organ system eliminates liquid and gaseous wastes from the body?circulatoryendocrineexcretoryreproductive
When visiting the beach, Felicity observed that a breeze blew in from the ocean during the day and out toward the ocean at night. Which factor is most responsible for the direction of land and sea breezes in coastal regions?the revolution of Earth around the Sunthe uneven heating between the land and waterthe gravitational pull of Earth on the atmospherethe daily rise and fall of tides in a regular pattern
Which pathway do most nutrients take after a person takes a bite of food?digestive system -> circulatory system -> body cellscirculatory system -> body cells -> digestive systemdigestive system -> body cells -> circulatory systemcirculatory system -> digestive system -> body cells
Sound reaches our ears because sound makes air particlesheat up.cool down.slow down.vibrate.
Which event is an example of conduction?Sunlight travels from the Sun to warm Earth.Boiling water in a pot warms a spoon inside the pot.A fire in a fireplace warms the air in a room.Cold water is heated in a microwave oven.
Which type of energy is transferred from one object to another by simple machines?mechanicalchemicalnuclearelectrical
Which statement best describes how energy transfer within Earth's atmosphere can affect a weather condition?During radiation, objects directly transfer heat to each other which affects the air temperature.During radiation, electromagnetic waves transfer heat and light energy which affects the air temperature.During convection, objects directly transfer heat to each other which affects the amount of precipitation.During convection, electromagnetic waves transfer heat and light energy which affects the amount of precipitation.
What is the smallest part of a gold ring that is still gold?an atoman electrona moleculea compound
Which tool should a carpenter use to measure the length of a wooden board?balancemeter stickthermometergraduated cylinder
If an ecosystem's balance is disturbed by a volcanic eruption, what will most likely occur?The ecosystem will not change from its original state.The ecosystem will eventually become balanced again.The consumers in the ecosystem will begin to consume carbon dioxide.The consumers in the ecosystem will begin to produce more oxygen.
One example of a trait passed from a parent plant to its offspring is ___.the amount of water in the plant's environmentthe amount of sunlight shining on the plantthe color of the flowers on the plantthe nutrients in the soil where the plant grows
Many organisms have structures for protection and survival. Which structure is most similar to tree bark?bird beakbear clawshuman skinsnake fangs
The human respiratory system is responsible for removingfat from cellscarbon dioxide from bloodhormones from glandsnutrients from food
Humans are protected from some infections by specialized cells which produce chemicals thatdestroy microbesrecycle nutrientsallow locomotioncoordinate movement
Which two forms of energy could best be used to increase the temperature of a sheet of copper?heat and lightheat and soundlight and magnetismelectricity and sound
Which gas is the most abundant in Earth's atmosphere?oxygennitrogenwater vaporcarbon dioxide
Which best explains why stars seen in the night sky are less bright than the Sun?Other stars are farther from Earth than the Sun.Other stars are facing away from Earth.Other stars are smaller than the Sun.Other stars are producing less light.
A scientist observed that the loss of plants near a stream resulted in more soil being washed downstream. How will the excess soil that travels downstream reduce biodiversity?It will destroy the fish habitat.It will provide nutrients to algae.It will change the water temperature.It will introduce an invasive species.
When Earth's shadow falls on the Moon, the shadow causes ahigh tidelow tidelunar eclipseMoon phase
A class conducts an experiment to determine the best color to paint a solar water heater that they plan to build. For their experimental test, the students have four identical cans. They paint one black, one green, one red, and one white. Each can is filled with 500 mL of 22°C water, and is allowed to sit in the sun for two hours. Which color can will have the greatest increase in water temperature?blackgreenredwhite
Which of these properties of water has the greatest effect on the water cycle?neutral pHfreezing and boiling pointsdissolves many substancesforms six-sided crystals
What causes day and night on Earth?tilting of Earth's axisrotation of Earth on its axismovement of Earth around the sunmovement of the sun around Earth
Which process is an example of a physical change?wood burningiron rustingice meltingmilk souring
The water cycle requires energy. The main source of energy for the water cycle iswindgravitythe sunthe moon
Which of these is the fundamental unit of life?systemorgantissuecell
Which would be the most important to consider when selecting material for the walls and ceiling of a concert hall?chemical propertiesmechanical propertiesthermal propertiesacoustical properties
When microorganisms deplete the oxygen in soil through respiration, the soil becomeshumus.anaerobic.compost.aerobic.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is the agency responsible for the space program in the United States. What was the goal of NASA's Apollo program?to search for life on planets other than Earthto land on a planet in another solar systemto determine the composition the Sunto send a human to land on the Moon
A lack of control in the muscular system is most likely related to a problem in what other organ system?nervousimmuneexcretorydigestive
The Russian thistle, commonly known as the tumbleweed, is a big, round plant with many branches and short, stiff leaves. This plant spreads a large number of seeds when it breaks off from its stalk. The thistle is most likely found in what kind of environment?swampprairieforesttundra
Scientists find dinosaur fossils in the bottom rock layers of a cliff and mammal fossils in the middle rock layer of the cliff. Which could best be concluded from this evidence?Dinosaurs ate plants.Dinosaurs were eaten by the mammals.Dinosaurs lived on Earth before the mammals.Dinosaurs and mammals lived at the same time.
Joyce put 200 milliliters of water in a beaker, put a thermometer in it, and heated it until it started to boil. She recorded a temperature of 100°C when it started to boil. She repeated the process with 400 milliliters of water. What would be the temperature when the second sample started to boil?twice as high as the first sample'sslightly higher than the first sample'shalf as high as the first sample'sthe same as the first sample's
A student wrote the following claim on a homework assignment: "Eukaryotic cells need more lipids than prokaryotic cells." Which statement below provides the BEST support for her claim?Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus.Eukaryotic cells make up multicellular organisms.Eukaryotic cells contain membrane-bound organelles.Eukaryotic cells perform cellular respiration.
A black bear eats many different things, including grasses, roots, and berries. It also eats insects, fish, and other small animals. Which of these BEST describes a black bear?OmnivoreCarnivoreHerbivoreProducer
A student finds a beaker with a chip in the rim. What should he do with the beaker?use it and then dispose of ituse it and then return it to where he got itdispose of the beaker and get a new oneput it back where he found it and get a new one
The sum of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom is called thevalence.mass number.chemical property.electrical charge.
In which of the following are nutrients directly absorbed from the bloodstream?cellorganorganismstissue
Making aluminum cans from recycled materials instead of raw materials is a wise choice because itsaves time.saves trees.creates energy.reduces pollution.
What happens to climate and weather over a summer?Weather varies more than climate.Climate varies more than weather.Climate varies, but weather stays the same.Weather and climate vary to the same degree.
A thermometer shows that the outside air temperature is colder than the temperature at which water turns to ice. However, ice on the sidewalk melts. What probably caused this?The air heating the sidewalkThe sidewalk reflecting sunlight into the airThe wind causing the ice on the sidewalk to meltThe sunlight making the sidewalk warmer than the air
Which trait gives owls an advantage when hunting at night?large eyesbroad wingsstraight beaksmooth feathers
Wood is considered a renewable resource becauseoxygen is released by trees.trees can be replanted.there are many varieties of trees.trees are used for many purposes.
Which event is an example of a chemical change?fog rising off a riverwood burning in a fireplaceice cream melting in the sunshinegrinding peppercorn into pepper flakes
Oxygen-rich blood returns from the lungs to the heart. Which two systems are most directly involved in this process?excretory and digestivecirculatory and excretorydigestive and respiratoryrespiratory and circulatory
From simplest to most complicated, how are multicellular organisms organized?organ system, organ, cell, tissueorgan, tissue, cell, organ systemtissue, cell, organ system, organcell, tissue, organ, organ system
A student wants to find out whether storms with lightning produce more rain than storms without lightning. Which is the best way to answer this question?average the amount of rain that fell during a lightning stormcount number of lightning strikes during a one-hour periodrecord rainfall amounts in storms with and without lightningcalculate the number of fires that are caused by lightning strikes
How many different elements are in the 20 compound sodium carbonate (Na2CO3)?1367
In a lab, a bacterial strain shows resistance to an antibiotic. The presence of the antibiotic allows an existing variant within the genetic code to help the bacteria survive. The resistance of bacteria due to an existing genetic variant can be best described as which process?natural selectionselective breedingasexual reproductionbehavioral adaptation
Which of the following is NOT a mixture?SmokeSugarMilkPaint
Which two properties of a crayon will stay about the same after the crayon is melted?Shape and physical stateTemperature and hardnessColor and massThickness and texture
Which human organ system produces hormones to regulate growth, development, and reproduction?circulatorydigestivenervousendocrine
As some organisms die, their remains become buried by mud and are eventually compressed into a type of rock. Which of these is a rock type that forms from this process?igneoussedimentarymagmametamorphic
Based on the organization of living things, tissuesform systems.are made of cells.are made of organs.do the work of cells.
Which body system is directly threatened when bacteria infect the lungs?muscularnervousrespiratoryexcretory
Where do good bacteria grow to help keep people healthy?in the brainin the bloodon the skinon the bones
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) causes AIDS. The first known human cases AIDS were in Africa in the late 1950s. Since then, tens of millions of people have died from the disease, and tens of millions more people all over the world are infected. Which term best describes the disease AIDS?isolated casesoutbreakepidemicpandemic
7. What is the cause of most earthquakes?the rotation of Earththe direction of the windthe pull of Earth's gravitythe movement of plates on Earth's crust
Which phenomena occur as a result of the gravitational attraction between the moon and Earth?eclipsesocean tidesseasonal changesphases of the moon
Which statement best describes how the circulatory system and respiratory system can work together?Toxins are removed from the bloodstream by the liver.The stomach signals for the production of gastric juices.Food molecules are transported to the organs of the body.Gases are exchanged between the lungs and blood vessels.
Animals depend on plants for many things, including food. What do plants depend on from animals?energy for photosynthesispest controlcarbon dioxideoxygen
Less force is required to launch a spaceship from the surface of the Moon than to launch an identical ship from the surface of Earth becausethe Moon has a smaller surface area than Earth.the mass of an object on Earth is greater than on the Moon.the gravitational field of the Moon is less than that of Earth.the atmosphere of the Moon is much thinner than that of Earth.
Two of Earth's plates pushed together, and the ground moved. What happened?an earthquakea landslidea volcanoan avalanche
Which of these were formed by glaciers that flowed through the Ruby Mountain region in northeastern Nevada?lakesdesertsvolcanic necksV-shaped valleys
A student prepared the following list of characteristics about a cellular organelle. present in animal cells present in plant cells helps make energy available to the cell Which of the following cellular structures is the student describing?cell wallchloroplastmitochondrionnucleus
Brian knows deserts get less rain than other ecosystems. However, he also knows that plants can survive in the desert. Which characteristic of a plant most likely helps it live in a desert?the ability to store waterthe ability to attract insectsthe ability to stop predatorsthe ability to drop its leaves
After a volcanic eruption, it takes a long time for large ecosystems to fully recover. Which statement best explains why the development takes so long?Space is limited for growth.The quality of light is low.Soil must be created.Minerals are destroyed.
The atomic number of an element refers to the number ofelectrons in the outer shell.neutrons in the outer shell.electrons in the nucleus.protons in the nucleus.
In an ecosystem, not all of the energy that is available is used by the organisms. Some energy becomes unavailable before it can be transferred to organisms in the next trophic level. How does the energy most likely become unavailable?The energy is stored as food.The energy is dissipated as heat.The energy is trapped in dead organisms.The energy is moved to another ecosystem.
Which of the following is a direct result of Earth's tilt on its axis?tidesseasonsweathergravity
Tony always drinks water before and after his long bike rides. Why does his body need water when he exercises?Drinking water after exercise allows the body to sleep.Drinking water after exercise helps to replace lost fluids.Drinking water before exercise helps increase the heart rate.Drinking water before exercise prevents the body from sweating.
On a field trip in a wooded area, you see a small, strange object. You wonder whether is is a live animal. The best way to find out is to observe the object to see if ithas an odor.has separate parts.can make a noise and has a lifelike color.carries out basic life functions.
Liquid cooking oil was poured into a container. Which statement best describes a property of the cooking oil after it was poured into the container?Its color changed.Its mass increased.Its volume stayed the same.Its temperature quickly increased.
The Sun heats the atmosphere of Earth unevenly. Which of the following is the most likely result of this uneven heating?Convection in the atmosphere causes a change in air density, resulting in winds.Conduction through the atmosphere causes evaporation to occur over oceans, resulting in rain.Radiation from the Sun will reflect through the atmosphere back into space resulting in cooler evenings.Radiation from the Sun will cause atmospheric moisture to collect over mountain ranges resulting in snowfall.
A 20-N force acts on a 5-kg object at rest. How fast will the object accelerate on a frictionless surface?4 m/s^215 m/s^225 m/s^2100 m/s^2
Increasing and revising scientific knowledge of different types of bacteria will most likely enable scientists to develop ways tohelp patients spend less time in the emergency room.aid research students who are studying complex organisms.help make medicines from newly discovered plants.develop specialized antibiotics that are directed at single-celled organisms.
What are produced in both the male and female reproductive systems in humans?spermnutrientsfertilized eggssex cells
The burning of fossil fuels in cities results in high levels of air pollution. Which urban design would best help reduce air pollution?numerous park areasfrequent trash recyclingefficient public transportationeffective street lighting
Which is an inherited trait?dimplesscrapesshort hairdirty fingernails
How is xylem similar to phloem in a plant?They both take in water from the soil.They both transport materials through the plant.They both make sugar in the leaves.They both store waste products in the plant cells.
In a recycling program, people can separate paper from their other trash. The paper is sent to factories and turned into new products. What does paper recycling help conserve the most?airgasolinetreeswater
Water cycles through three states of matter on Earth. What has the greatest effect on the state of matter of water?tidesgravitythe sunthe moon
Which physical feature exists both on Earth and on the Moon?lakesforestsmountainsclouds
Animals and plants are made up of a number of different chemical elements. What happens to all of these elements when animals and plants die?They die with the animal or plant.They evaporate into the atmosphere.They are recycled back into the environment.They change into different elements.
Students are comparing different rocks. What do all rocks have in common?Rocks are made of one or more minerals.Rocks are made of two or more elements.Rocks are made of magma and sediments.Rocks are made of sand changed by pressure.
What is the most likely result of large-scale agricultural fertilization on aquatic systems?increased fish populationsmore biodiversity over timeless oxygen available for fishreduced water levels
In order for magma to be converted to igneous rock, which actions must occur?melting and coolingheating and pressureweathering and erosioncrystallization and cooling
Trees start as seeds and grow into mature trees that produce more seeds. This pattern represents afood chainlife cyclefood supplylife span
Which sequence identifies the levels of organization of body structures in a human from simplest to most complex?cell -> organ -> tissue -> organ systemorgan system -> cell -> tissue -> organtissue -> organ -> organ system -> cellcell -> tissue -> organ -> organ system
A cell completes the synthesization of a protein by adding a carbohydrate to the protein's structure. At which site in the cell is the carbohydrate added?the nucleusa ribosomea mitochondrionthe Golgi apparatus
All atoms of an element have in their nuclei the same number ofelectrons.isotopes.molecules.protons.
Henry learned that without the right kind of energy, plants cannot survive. What form of energy is used by plants to perform photosynthesis?electricallightmechanicalwind
As a corn plant ages, its leaves grow. Which process is directly responsible for the growth of these leaves?the division of cells in the plantthe release of oxygen from the plantthe absorption of carbon dioxide in the stemthe transportation of nutrients from the roots
Which scientist is best known for research that led to the modern understanding of the atom?NewtonDaltonGalileoCopernicus
Which body system typically recognizes, attacks, and destroys foreign cells or substances that may cause disease?digestiveexcretoryimmunerespiratory
Cell membranes allow some molecules to move freely across the membrane, while other molecules are restricted. Which term best describes this capability of a cell membrane?semipermeableimperviousresilientunyielding
Which statement describes the transfer of energy when an ice cube is placed in a cup of hot tea?Heat flows from the tea to the ice.Cold flows from the ice to the tea.Cold flows from the ice, and heat flows from the tea.Heat flows simultaneously between the ice and the tea.
Which is the most cooperative relationship between species?mutualismpredationparasitismcoexistence
A dog rolls over and receives a treat. The dog rolls over again. This is an example oflearned behavior.adaptive behavior.inherited behavior.instinctive behavior.
Which type of rock is formed when particles are compacted and cemented together?igneousmetallicmetamorphicsedimentary
Tree roots can grow into rock and break it apart. Water can freeze in the cracks of rock, causing it to break apart. How are these two processes alike?Both are forces.Both affect weather.Both form new kinds of rock.Both are forms of weathering.
Energy is absorbed and released through endothermic and exothermic processes. Which is an example of an exothermic process?ice meltingice sublimatingwater evaporatingwater freezing
Where is most fresh (non-salty) water on Earth located?oceansriverslakespolar ice caps
When a molecule is separated into its component parts, it formscompounds.atoms.protons.ions.
The universe is believed to be approximately 14 billion years old. As a result of gravitational attraction, which most likely developed first after the Big Bang?a planeta cometa moona star
Which is a function of the cardiovascular system?to move water throughout the bodyto provide structural support for the bodyto eliminate waste from the bodyto transport gases throughout the body
When a fern reproduces with spores, the offspringwill be genetically identical to the parent plant.will be better able to adapt to the environment.will have half the genetic materials of the parent plant.will have twice the genetic materials of the parent plant.
The process of water changing from its liquid state to a gas in the water cycle is known asprecipitation.evaporation.condensation.translation.
In which situation would osmosis most likely occur in cells?across a permeable membrane that separates solutions of the same concentrationacross a permeable membrane that separates solutions of different concentrationsacross a nonpermeable membrane that separates solutions of the same concentrationacross a nonpermeable membrane that separates solutions of different concentrations
A scientist is watching birds from far away. Which object is the scientist most likely using to watch the birds?gogglesbinocularssunglassesmicroscope
Studies of earthquake waves have helped scientists determine thestructure of Earth's interiordepth of the oceanscause of dinosaur extinctionage of Earth
Needles on a cactus plant are actually leaves. This needle shape helps the plant survive bycatching food.preventing water loss.staying in place.reproducing.
Compost piles have many parts, such as leaves, moisture, vegetables, and microorganisms. Which part of a compost pile breaks down materials and adds nutrients to the soil?leavesmoisturevegetablesmicroorganisms
A piece of pine wood floats on the surface of a lake because the water exertsan upward force equal to the weight of the wood.a downward force equal to the weight of the wood.an upward force equal to the weight of the displacement water.a downward force equal to the weight of the displacement water.
All living things contain which element?helium.sodium.copper.carbon.
A student performed an experiment to see how long it would take for a cup of water to freeze. Which information would another student most likely need in order to perform the same experiment?the time to beginthe volume of the cupthe temperature of the icethe type of thermometer to use
A student wants to know which type of soil holds the most water. Which action should the student most likely do to answer the question?compare how the soils are alikeput the soils into different groupsrecord the weight of the soilwatch how quickly the soil drains
Which of these is required to support the theory of star formation?laws passed by the governmentInternet sites discussing star formationpictures of stars of different agesevaluation of data by many scientists
The frequency of a wave is measured inhertz.meters.hertz/second.meters/minute.
Which process causes the fastest changes to the surface of Earth?a large glacier forming on a mountainstrong winds wearing away a rock cliffa major earthquake happening in a mountain rangemany waves on a lake moving pebbles onto a beach
Organisms contribute to the water cycle mainly through the process ofirrigation.evaporation.precipitation.transpiration.
Which of these tools is most helpful to a scientist observing very small bacteria?rulertelescopemicroscopemeter stick
Apple slices were divided evenly between two identical metal boxes. A lighted 20-watt incandescent light bulb was placed in box A, and a lighted 20-watt fluorescent light was placed in box B. The apple slices in box A dried faster than those in box B becausefluorescent light is a luminous light.incandescent light produces more heat.fluorescent light has a lower frequency.incandescent light causes a chemical reaction.
What season is it in the United States when the South Pole is tilted toward the Sun?summerfallwinterspring
Which of these colors of visible light has the shortest wavelength?redgreenvioletyellow
Which of the following units best represents the density of an object?kghrm/s^2g/cm^3
Which statement below best explains why several fossils of sea organisms were discovered buried deep in an area of dry land?The fossils changed locations.The area had a shift in climate.The land was once underwater.A glacier once covered the area.
Last year Steve was shorter than his brother. This year Steve is taller than his brother. What cell process is directly responsible for Steve's growth?diffusionmitosisosmosisrespiration
In which state are molecules of a substance arranged in the most orderly way?gasliquidplasmasolid
Weather stations built in urban areas can be influenced by the human-made structures that surround these stations. Some of these weather stations used to determine mean temperatures in the United States have had the validity of the data questioned. Which human-produced effect could these urban weather stations be measuring?heat islandrain shadowland breezecold front
How is the mass of an atom calculated?add the number of protons to the number of electronsadd the number of protons to the number of neutronssubtract the number of protons from the number of neutronssubtract the number of electrons from the sum of protons and neutrons
Over a long period, some flowering plants have become dependent on honey bees for pollination. In recent years, a form of mite has infected and killed the honey bees in many areas of the country. Since this has happened, the once bee-dependent plants with the best chance of surviving are those thatgrow taller so that the few remaining honey bees will find them.change their flowers so that wind will fertilize them.have always attracted many other insects as wells as honey bees.have seeds that stay alive for a long time in the environment.
Which of these atomic structures has the least amount of mass?an iona protona neutronan electron
An increase of carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere is most likely to have which effect?decreased variations in day lengthincreased average air temperatureincreased burn rate for incoming meteoroidsdecreased rate of ozone layer destruction
Which of the following is an inherited human trait?eye colorsleep patternssense of balancesense of humor
Snow turns to liquid water when itfreezes.melts.condenses.evaporates.
Which energy source is nonrenewable?sunlightbiomasswindfossil fuel
The Moon is in orbit around Earth. What keeps the Moon from changing its orbit?frictiongravityweightrotation
Which form of water, when present in the atmosphere, is most likely to contribute to global warming?cloudrainvaporsnow
Which statement explains why ducklings follow their mother when swimming across a pond?Survival behavior is acquired by interaction with the parent duck.Survival behavior is learned by interacting with their environment.Inherited behavior is genetically obtained through their environment.Inherited behavior is genetically passed on from parents to offspring.
Some students measure the mass of a small pile of leaves before and after the leaves decompose. Each time the students measure the mass, they place a container with the decomposing leaves on a balance. Before recording the mass of the leaves, the students must do which of the following?Subtract the mass of the containerAdd leaves from other plants to the containerAllow the leaves to settle in the container for a few daysUse a metric ruler to measure the volume of the container
Ava conducted an experiment to determine respiratory rates during different activities. She counted the number of breaths per minute. Ava noted that the number of breaths increases as physical activity increases. Why is there an increase in the number of breaths per minute as activity increases?As activity increases, more oxygen is exhaled.As activity increases, breathing becomes more efficient.As activity increases, the oxygen needs of cells increase.As activity increases, the rate of the heart beating increases.
The temperature in a classroom is 15°C (59°F). The teacher turns the thermostat to 20°C (68°F) and keeps the door closed. Which of the following statements best describes the change that occurs as the temperature in the room increases to 20°C?Cold air molecules collide to generate heat energy.Cold energy in the room transforms into heat energy.The room becomes warmer as heat energy is added to the room.The room becomes warmer as cold energy is pushed out of the room.
A flat piece of paper has a mass of 5 grams. When the paper is crumpled into a ball, the mass of the crumpled paper ismuch more than that of the flat paper.slightly more than that of the flat paper.the same as that of the flat paper.slightly less than that of the flat paper.
Minerals are used for making many things including jewelry, chalk, and concrete. Where do we get the minerals needed to make these things?from airfrom woodfrom rocksfrom crops
Scientists have observed that, even within the same nest, some young birds call louder than others. Which describes how a louder cry helps to ensure survival?Lung capacity is increased.Exposure to bacteria is increased.Parents are able to identify the nest.Parents respond by giving more food.
Two galaxies are interacting with each other. What is the force that draws these two galaxies toward each other?frictiongravityelectricitymagnetism
Which procedure correctly describes materials combining?Salt and sand are added to hot water and stirred making a mixture.Oil and water are placed in a sealed bottle and shaken making a compound.Sugar and water are added to flour and cooked in an oven making an element.Soil and water are shaken in a container and left to separate forming two elements.
Plants growing in a pond release a gas that fish need to survive. Which gas do the plants release that fish use?heliumhydrogennitrogenoxygen
A ball rolling on the ground is observed to slow down and stop. Based on Newton's first law of motion, what is the best conclusion?An object in motion eventually stops.The ball must have been going slightly uphill.The ball did not have enough mass to keep going.There must have been an outside force acting on the ball.
What is the chemical formula for carbon dioxide?COCO2CO2
A student rubs his hands together to warm them. His hands get warm due tofrictiongravitymagnetismsound
Scientists studying migrating birds and homing pigeons have discovered that they navigate by monitoring differences in the intensity and inclination of Earth's magnetic field. Special cells in bird beaks can detect these changes as the birds fly over Earth's surface. Which metal did the scientists find in the cells that birds use as a magnetometer?irongoldmercuryaluminum
A scientist found a fossil of an organism that had gills. When the organism was living, the area in which it lived was most likely covered by ___.forestgrasslandbare rockwater
Which is the best way to help protect the environment?wash hands before each mealdo a science project about energyride a bike to school instead of riding in a carpack a lunch instead of buying a school lunch
An electric motor is designed to turn electrical energy into ___.solar energypotential energystatic electricitymechanical energy
If a student playing the drums hits the drums with greater force, the sound would bequieter.louder.lower in pitch.higher in pitch.
As the loudness of a sound wave increases, which will also increase?amplitudefrequencyvelocitywavelength
Telescopes use lenses to observe distant objects such as stars. Which term best describes what happens when lenses bend and concentrate light?reflectingpolarizingdiffractingrefracting
Which of these must occur when a substance goes through a chemical change?The substance gets larger.The substance changes phases.The substance changes shape.The substance forms a new substance.
Scientists use ice cores to identify and explain previous climatic trends. By correlating climatic conditions recorded in the ice, with solid, nonsnow particles also found in the ice, scientists can help to predict the climatic impact of which phenomena?atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration changesradioactive decay rate changes in the outer corevolcanic eruptionsmagnetic pole reversals
Coal, oil, and natural gas have high potential energies, which makes them valuable energy resources. In order to benefit from the energy available in these fossil fuels, the potential energy is converted most directly into which type of energy?chemicalelectricalsolarthermal
What change would occur if Earth's rate of rotation significantly increased?The year would be shorter.The year would be longer.The day would be shorter.The day would be longer.
Humans can do many things to impact the environment. Which of these is an example of how humans negatively impact the environment?planting more treesburning less fossil fuelreducing beach erosionincreasing water runoff
Eyeglasses help a nearsighted person see as a result ofabsorption.diffraction.reflection.refraction.
A student measures the rising temperature of heated water for 20 minutes in two-minute intervals. Which of these tools will best help the student organize the data?flow chartpie chartdata tablebar graph
A rock formation in a land area contains fossils. Over time, tremendous heat and pressure change the formation to produce a harder rock formation without fossils. Which change in rock type has occurred in this land area?Igneous rock has turned into sedimentary rock.Igneous rock has turned into metamorphic rock.Sedimentary rock has turned into igneous rock.Sedimentary rock has turned into metamorphic rock.
Which is not an inherited trait in humans?blue eyeslong fingerscalloused handsattached earlobes
The wind helps many plants reproduce by ___.cooling the plantsgiving the plants moisturespreading the plants' pollenstrengthening the plants' root systems
The human hearing range is 20-20,000 hertz. A sound Peggy heard was measured at 15,000 hertz. Which characteristic best describes the sound wave that Peggy heard?fast speedhigh frequencylarge amplitudelong wavelength
A student is asked to measure the distance from the floor to the ceiling in a classroom. Which unit of measurement should the student most likely use to accurately measure this distance?literkilolitermeterkilometer
Which of the following explains why elements, such as carbon and oxygen, that are used in organic molecules are not permanently removed from the environment?They are replenished by sunlight.They are cycled through ecosystems.They are replaced by volcanic eruptions.They are produced constantly from nutrients.
A student is measuring the speed at which a ball rolls down a ramp. Which unit of measurement is the student most likely using to describe the speed of the ball?meter per literseconds per grammilligrams per litercentimeters per second
Marta and Roger are comparing how long it takes two different types of seeds to sprout. They plant both types of seeds in similar pots, place them in a sunny window, and water them daily. If they want to conduct their investigation correctly, which information is most important to record?the depth of the soilthe temperature of the waterthe number of days until the seeds sproutthe size of pot used for growing the seeds
Deposition of sediment will most likely form acave.delta.river.mountain.
During a space mission, scientists will send experiments for the astronauts to conduct in space. In many cases, scientists have made predictions about the outcome of the experiment. Why do astronauts perform the experiment if the results have already been predicted?to obtain data to test a hypothesisto make a complete observationto make a report of the proceduresto make a hypothesis understandable
Approximately 14,000 years ago, the climate in North America began to warm rapidly. At the same time, human hunters migrated to the continent. Which of these most likely resulted from a combination of these two factors?a reduction in the rate of species changean increase in the rate of large mammal extinctionsan increase in the amount of interspecies cooperationa reduction in the total number of small parasitic insects
Which is an SI unit for density?lbkglb/ft^3kg/m^3
In the United States, each day the Sun appears torise in the west and set in the east.rise in the east and set in the west.rise in the north and set in the south.rise in the south and set in the north.
Which substance is magnetic and conducts heat?woodplasticironpaper
During a biochemical reaction, pyruvate (C3H4O3) is converted into carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). In what cellular organelle does this biochemical reaction occur?nucleuscytoplasmmitochondriaendoplasmic reticulum
A student fails to eat a balanced diet over a period of time. This lack of a balanced diet can lead toselective breedingdynamic equilibriumextinctiondisease
In 1989, an oil spill off the coast of Alaska led to a decline in the population of many organisms. Which other population was most likely affected by the drop in population of the fish, otters, and seals?deereaglesfrogssnakes
Which of these is the best reason for exercising on space flights?to increase strength for moving around in the cabinto keep from becoming overweight on a space missionto minimize the loss of muscle mass due to microgravityto ensure that bodily fluids do not tend to collect in the feet
With the development of the microscope, scientists were able to see cells for the first time. Why was it difficult to view cells without a microscope?Cells are small.Cells are alive.Cells move quickly.Cells have an electrical charge.
Fertilizers can enable farmers to grow the same crop in a field for several years in a row. Farmers who use less fertilizer often rotate their crops by planting the crop one year and legumes, such as beans and clover, the following year. Fertilizer use and crop rotation with legumes both increase the availability of which of the following nutrients in soil?calciumnitrogenoxygenprotein
Which two processes occur during the life spans of all animals?hibernation and migrationgrowth and developmentchanging color and shedding furbuilding nests and communication
Which of the following is true regarding the properties of an air mass?An air mass is warmer at the leading edge and cooler at the trailing edge.An air mass has similar temperature and moisture properties throughout it.An air mass is cooler near the edges and has greater moisture near the center.An air mass has greater moisture near the edges and is cooler near the center.
When entire communities in an ecosystem change over time, it is known asmigration.extinction.overpopulation.ecological succession.
What should be added to soil to increase its water retention?pebblessandrocksclay
A rosebush and a bird are similar because they bothare living organisms.need to search for food.make their own food.are non-living organisms.
The mineral quartz naturally forms in various colors. Which difference in quartz formation results in the different colors?pressure at which the processes occurredtemperature at which the processes occurredchemical impurities present as the processes occurredamount of time passed since the processes occurred
What happens to a moist air mass as it moves upward in the atmosphere?It becomes warmer and forms clouds.It becomes cooler and forms clouds.Its temperature remains the same.Its temperature varies greatly.
Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb infrared radiation from Earth's surface and re-radiates some of it back to Earth. Which of these gases have the most significant impact on the temperature of Earth's atmosphere?nitrogen and argonoxygen and sulfur dioxidecarbon dioxide and water vaporhydrochloric acid and hydrogen
Volcanoes are considered constructive because theydeposit lava.cause erosion.trigger earthquakes.release gases.
What happens to sugar when it is combined with water?it separatesit dissolvesit floats to the topit becomes warm
Pesticides are chemicals that kill insects. What could happen if the pesticides killed all the pollinators near some apple trees?The trees could not make leaves.The trees could not make flowers.The trees could not make seeds.The trees could not make bark.
Which statement describes the formation of a delta?A large mass of ice and snow accumulates.A mound of sand is built by wind.A low area of land is surrounded by mountains.A mass of sediment is deposited at the mouth of a river.
Hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water. The water in this reaction is described asan atoma reactantan elementa compound
Which of these cell parts store genetic instructions for the entire organism and transfers them from one generation to the next?chloroplastsmitochondriaDNA moleculesnuclear membranes
Which list describes the particles that make up an atom?nucleus, electrons, and quarksprotons, neutron, and electronsionic bonds, covalent bonds, and ionsnucleus, electron cloud, and energy levels
Earth has a limited supply of fresh drinking water. Which method is used to recycle water for humans to use?bottling waterdam constructioncollecting rainwaterwastewater treatment
A plover bird eats bits of food that become stuck in a crocodile's teeth without being hurt. The crocodile gets its teeth cleaned and the bird gets food. Which type of relationship exists between the bird and the crocodile?mutualismcommensalismparasitismphototropism
What can scientists learn about the past by studying sedimentary rocks?how a species changed over timehow animals made a shelterthe color of leaves on a plantthe number of chambers in a dinosaur's heart
A scientific explanation should include a demonstration of the relationships betweenmeasurement, form, and function.changes, interactions, and formulas.logic, evidence, and current knowledge.hypothesis, problem solving, and lab equipment.
A plant that has traits identical to the parent plant provides evidence that the plantresulted from sexual reproduction.resulted from asexual reproduction.will develop many seeds.will have large leaves.
Which property would best help a student determine if two substances are made of two different elements?massshapedensityvolume
Evidence of organisms that lived on Earth a long time ago would most likely be found incrystals.lava.sedimentary rock.metamorphic rock.
Which type of energy does a radiator give off ?heatlightsolarelectrical
While hiking through Granville State Forest, a student finds an unusual plant-like organism that appears to lack chlorophyll. When the student examines a sample using a microscope, he sees many cells with cell walls and no chloroplasts. This organism is most likely a member of what Kingdom?AnimaliaEubacteriaFungiProtista
A student conducts an experiment to determine the effect soap has on the growth of radish seeds. He puts 30 seeds in three different dishes: one with water, one with a 1% soap solution, and one with a 10% soap solution. Which type of data should he collect?size of seeds and amount of solution usedtime of day and number of seeds germinatedtype of detergent and amount of solution usednumber of seeds germinated and average length of shoot
Which of the following statements best describes how the use of interchangeable parts has affected car manufacturing?The number of cars produced has decreased.The need for custom manufacturing has increased.The efficiency of manufacturing plants has increased.The number of countries producing cars has decreased.
Which quantity must equal zero if a car is moving at a constant rate along a straight line?speed of the cardirection of the carenergy of the caracceleration of the car
Which widely used energy sources are nonrenewable and also a source of greenhouse gas emissions?wind turbineshydroelectric damsfossil fuelssolar cells
Use the information below to answer the question. In solid fuel rockets, a fuel mixture is burned and once the mixture starts burning it cannot be stopped. In liquid fuel rockets, there is a tank of fuel and a tank of oxygen. The burning of the fuel can be stopped by preventing the flow of fuel and oxygen into the combustion chamber. Based on this information, which system is more highly developed in liquid fuel rockets than in solid fuel rockets?propulsionsuspensioncontrolstructure
Some research has shown that the burning of fossil fuels contributes to an effect called global warming, which scientists believe is changing the chemical makeup of Earth's atmosphere. Use of which invention would help lower this effect?electric cardigital camerahigh-speed Internetbattery-powered radio
Which food contains the highest percentage of protein?ricedatescarrotschicken
When conducting an investigation involving an open flame, it is most important toturn out the lights to see better.smell the product that is being burned.work near the sink to put out possible fires.wear appropriate protective clothing and eyewear.
In ecosystems where people live, which of the following are most likely to cause an increase in diseases transmitted by water?floodsblizzardshailstormsavalanches
Aphids are small insects that sometimes live near ants. The ants protect the aphids from predators. The aphids produce a sweet substance that the ants eat. Which statement describes the relationship between ants and aphids?Both ants and aphids benefit.Both ants and aphids are unaffected.The ants benefit and the aphids are harmed.The aphids benefit and the ants are unaffected.
Soil will pack down over time which decreases the ability of the soil to hold water. Which animals would best help the soil hold water?earthworms making tunnels under the surfacecattle making depressions with their hooveshorses making trenches when they gallopsheep pulling up plants by their roots
At an archaeological dig site, scientists, volunteers, and students collect items used by people living hundreds of years ago. To determine the history of the different people who may have lived at the site, which is the best method to classify the recovered items?by the type of itemby the size of the itemby the person who located the itemby the soil layer where the item was found
It is hypothesized that in the next 200 years, the lowest land areas on Earth could be submerged beneath rising oceans. Which climate change would most likely cause this to occur?global warmingdecreased windsthe start of an ice ageincreased desertification
Miriam notices when she goes to the beach that sometimes the water rises as high as the pier. At other times of the day, the water barely covers the pillars under the pier. These differences in water level are primarily due to the gravitational influence of which of the following?the Sunthe Moonasteroidscomets
Copper (Cu) reacts with oxygen (O) to form copper oxide (CuO). The properties of CuO are most likelydifferent from copper or oxygen.similar to both copper and oxygen.similar only to copper.similar only to oxygen.
Carbon dioxide produced by cells is removed from the body primarily by which body system?digestiveexcretoryimmunerespiratory
The ocean minimum zone, or OMZ, is an area from 200 to 600 meters below the ocean's surface. The OMZ is dark and cold, with oxygen concentrations less than 10% of concentrations in surface water. Oxygen concentrations are so low because of bacterial activity that breaks down organic material falling from surface waters. Given the conditions in the OMZ, which of these dissolved gases would you expect to find in large concentrations in this zone?argonnitrogencarbon dioxidecarbon monoxide
Two students went fishing one morning and caught 20 fish. The afternoon before, they caught 5 fish. Because of their morning success, they claimed that morning was the best time to fish. Which of these would most likely disprove their claim?catching more than 20 fish in the same locationcatching more than 20 fish in another locationcatching more than 20 fish the next afternooncatching more than 20 fish the next morning
Which question can be answered by scientific experimentation and observation?Are dogs better pets than cats?How many stars are in the universe?In what type of light will a plant grow best?How many organisms have lived on Earth?
During cellular respiration glucose molecules undergo a series of reactions. This process results in the formation of up to 38 molecules of high-energy ATP per each molecule of glucose. Which is the source of the energy stored in these ATP molecules?kinetic energy generated by the chemical reactionschemical energy originally stored in the glucose moleculeelectric current created during the destruction of electrons in the glucosepotential energy from the difference in the concentration gradients of the cell
Lea is investigating how phosphates affect oxygen levels in pond water. For part of the investigation, she uses pond water that contains no phosphates. The pond water without phosphates would be what part of the investigation?conclusionhypothesiscontrol groupexperimental group
Which tool should a student use to examine spots on a frog?thermometerhand lensgraduated cylindermagnet
A group of scientists is studying the effect of cell phone signals on honeybees. Before starting the investigation, the scientists stated that the bees exposed to cell phone signals will have difficulty finding their way back to the hive. Which term best describes the statement made by the group of scientists?controldatahypothesisvariable
Which system is most responsible for transporting blood throughout the body?skeletal systemexcretory systemdigestive systemcirculatory system
Five hundred flies of one species were sprayed with a new insecticide. Twenty-four hours later, nearly all the flies were dead. However, a few survived. Which principle best explains why some flies survived?Animals adapt to new environments.New species develop from survivors.There is variation among individuals within a species.Insecticides may cause genetic mutations.
A student investigated the effect of the color of light on the growth of plants. Red, yellow, and green lights were used in the experiment. If another student were to conduct the same experiment, which would be the most important procedure to follow to yield the same results?to do the investigation at the same time of yearto use the same chart for recording growthto do the investigation in the same roomto use the same colors of lights
A large mammal lives in a cold, snowy environment. Which adaptation would best help the mammal survive in low temperatures?thick fursharp clawslarge earsstrong muscles
The temperatures in space vary from extremely cold to extremely hot. Earth's surface temperature is relatively stable. Which of these is most responsible for Earth's surface temperatures?solar radiation reflected from the Moonmany volcanic eruptions near the Ring of Firethe greenhouse effect in the atmosphereplankton distribution in shallow ocean waters
Which of the following correctly lists the organizational hierarchy of organisms from simplest to most complex?cells, organs, tissues, organ systems, organismscells, tissues, organs, organ systems, organismstissues, cells, organs, organ systems, organismstissues, organs, cells, organ systems, organisms
The carrion flower smells like rotting meat. What kind of pollinator is most likely attracted to the carrion flower?mothbutterflywaspfly
Which of the following best explains why the pressure inside a high-flying airplane must be controlled?At high altitudes there is greater atmospheric pressure than on the surface of the Earth.At high altitudes there is lower atmospheric pressure than on the surface of the Earth.If the cabin is not pressurized, ozone and other upper atmospheric gases will enter the airplane.If the cabin is not pressurized, carbon dioxide will escape from the airplane.
Hurricanes are large, powerful storms that form as they travel over warm ocean waters. What do oceans add to make hurricanes so strong?salt and waterwind and tidesheat and moisturewaves and flooding
Abnormal cell division may result indisease preventiontissue repairmetamorphosiscancer
What is the main reason humans need nitrogen to survive?Nitrogen is used in respiration to generate energy.Nitrogen is used in making the proteins in the body.Nitrogen is used to help the body eliminate wastes.Nitrogen is used by nerve cells to conduct impulses.
The phases of the Moon are daily changes in the appearance of the Moon. One reason Moon phases occur is because the Moon reflects sunlight. Which is another reason that the phases of the Moon occur?Earth is tilted on the axis.The Moon rises and sets.The Moon orbits Earth.Earth orbits the Sun.
Some campers are sitting around a campfire outside their tent. Which product of the fire is in the form of electromagnetic waves?lightsmokesoundwater vapor
Jon had a flat tire on his car. He used a hydraulic jack to lift the car up so that he could change the tire. If Jon knows the amount of force used to lift the car 0.25 meter off of the ground, what is he able to calculate?momentumpowerpressurework
Which organ is made mostly of muscle?heartlungearbrain
Which is considered a property of soil?streakfracturetextureluster
Which of these had the greatest impact on the current shape of Nevada's basin and range landscape?tidal forceswind erosionplate tectonicsglobal warming
Which of the following is the primary way that evergreen trees planted on the north and west sides of residences in Massachusetts help reduce winter heating costs?They insulate against cold air.They optimize solar heating.They reduce radiant cooling.They act as a windbreak.
Air is composed of nitrogen, oxygen, and other gases. Based on that information, air can be described asa compound.an element.a mixture.a molecule.
Which action should be taken in order to identify the streak of a mineral during an investigation?Weigh the mineralDip the mineral in acidHeat the mineral until it meltsDrag an edge of the mineral across a tile
In Type 1 diabetes, the immune system attacks the pancreatic cells that produce insulin. Without insulin, people that have Type 1 diabetes are unable to regulate blood glucose levels. What two symptoms are most likely associated with Type 1 diabetes?extreme thirst and weight lossintense aches and spasmssevere loss of hearing and visionexcessive loss of coordination and memory
When the cardboard cone of a radio speaker vibrates, it produces a sound in the air around it. The cone produces this sound by transferring which of the following to the air around it?heatcurrentwave motionmagnetic force
During a demonstration, a teacher pours CO_{2} gas over a candle, putting out the flame. Which physical property allows the teacher to pour the CO_{2} gas?The gas is more dense than the air.The gas is more visible than the air.The gas smells different from the air.The gas evaporates faster than the air.
Atoms of the same element can have different atomic masses because they can have different numbers ofneutrons.protons.electrons.neutrinos.
Which would be the best conductor of electricity?aircorkwatersilver
Part of a scientific method involves collecting data in order tochange a theory.test a hypothesis.write a procedure.make an observation.
Gravity is a measurable force of attraction which acts upon objects. Which characteristic determines the gravity of an object?frictionmasstensionweight
Which is NOT an example of a chemical change?Melting icecorroding silverBurning matchRotting vegetation
Seasons in Alaska are primarily caused by which factor as Earth revolves around the Sun?the tilt of Earth on its axisthe rate of rotation of Earththe effects of solar flare activitythe relative distance between Earth and the Sun
A student needs to measure out a precise amount of liquid. What is the best tool for the student to use?test tubemeter stickbalance scalegraduated cylinder
An octopus squirts black ink around itself to hide from predators. This adaptation is an example ofcreating shelterrecycling nutrientsa transfer of energya defense mechanism
Earthquakes are vibrations of Earth's crust. What device is used to measure the size of an earthquake?barometerDoppler radardepth scaleseismograph
A girl found the skull of an animal. She did not know what the animal was but she was sure that it preyed on other animals for its food. What clue led to this conclusion?The eye sockets faced sideways.The skull was much longer than it was wide.There was a projecting ridge along the top of the skull.Four of the teeth were long and pointed.The jaws could move sideways as well as up and down.
Which one of these animals does NOT lay eggs?chickensdogsfrogsturtles
Which characteristic does a euglena share with an amoeba?They reproduce by mitosis.They eat by phagocytosis.They respond to light stimuli.They move by changing shape.
Which of the following is most likely to disrupt the natural balance in an ecosystem?introduction of a non-native speciesreduced daylight hours during winterpreventing the cutting of trees in forestsriverbank erosion resulting from springtime flooding
Which of these correctly lists Earth's layers in order from the center to the surface?outer core, inner core, asthenosphere, lithosphereasthenosphere, lithosphere, outer core, inner coreinner core, asthenosphere, lithosphere, outer coreinner core, outer core, asthenosphere, lithosphere
The element nitrogen can be found in simple, nonliving substances, such as air, and in complex molecules in living organisms, such as DNA. Which statement explains why nitrogen can exist in many compounds?Nitrogen atoms are different sizes.Nitrogen atoms are different ages.Nitrogen atoms can bond to different atoms.Nitrogen atoms have different amounts of energy.
An enzyme in the Golgi apparatus catalyzes the addition of phosphates to which class of molecule?lipidcarbohydratenucleic acidprotein
Which is an example of water condensing? 1.puddle disappearing on a hot summer afternoonSweat forming on your forehead after you do a lot of exerciseIce cubes melting when you put them out in the sunDew forming on plants during a cold night
A delta at the mouth of a river is the direct result ofrunoff from sewage.deposition of sediment.an ancient glacier that passed through.an underground river flowing to the ocean.
Scientists have studied convergent boundaries and the results of the collisions. Besides the fact that mountains occur at these boundaries, which other part of the rock cycle is most likely associated with these areas of convergence?development of chemical rocksdevelopment of extrusive rocksdevelopment of layered rocksdevelopment of folded rocks
Which statement best describes the effect deforestation has on Earth's atmosphere?The amount of oxygen increases.The amount of methane increases.The amount of water vapor increases.The amount of carbon dioxide increases.
Many scientists think that when birds migrate to the same location each year, they find this location by using Earth'sjet stream.weather patterns.magnetic patterns.electrical discharges.
Which form of energy do plants need to capture in order to perform photosynthesis?heatsolarchemicalelectrical
A large number of species on Earth became extinct during a short time period about 65 million years ago. Based on this pattern of extinction, which is the most likely cause?gradual climate changecontinued climate stabilitysudden global climate changegradual ecosystem succession
Sofia put a bat house in a tree in her yard. The bats ate mosquitos in Sofia's yard at night and roosted in the house during the day. Droppings from the bat house nourished the tree. What kind of relationship exists between Sofia, the bats, and the tree?The relationship is competitive.The relationship is cooperative.The relationship is parasitic.The relationship is predatory.
Which of the following is the most basic need for a plant?shadeheatwatersand
A scientific article about the universe will most likely describe the universe asconsisting of billions of galaxies.being less than two billion years old.containing approximately ten planets.becoming smaller over time.
Which tool would be most useful for observing the details of an insect's wings?thermometerbalancehand lensgraduated cylinder
The instructions below outline the procedure for a demonstration. Materials: four 100 g metal blocks, each of a different metal four polystyrene foam cups, each containing 150 g of 10°C water Procedure: 1. Place the four cups of water next to each other on the lab bench. 2. Heat each block to a temperature of 60°C. 3. Place each heated block in a separate cup of 10°C water. 4. Measure the temperature change in each cup of water after 100 s. At the end of the demonstration, which block raised the temperature of the 10°C water the greatest amount?the block with the greatest densitythe block with the lowest surface areathe block with the greatest specific heatthe block with the lowest thermal conductivity
On the Galapagos Islands, an iguana that lives in the water is most likely able to survive without competition from an iguana that lives on land because itswims faster.has a larger body.has a tougher scaly skin.has a different food source.
Which of these warms most of the air, water, and land on Earth?CoalElectricitySunlightWind
A teacher was discussing with the class that a bowling ball has more inertia than a basketball. Which physical property is most likely being compared?areamassweightvolume
A dark colored wall becomes warm when the Sun is shining on it. After the Sun sets, a person standing a meter away can feel warmth from the wall. How does heat transfer from the wall to the person?radiationconductionconvectioninsulation
During exercise, the cardiovascular system works together with the respiratory system tomaintain blood pressure.remove carbon dioxide.produce red blood cells.filter out waste products.
How does flipping a switch turn on a light?It creates a spark.It breaks an electrical circuit.It generates electricity.It completes an electrical circuit.
A ship has a satellite communication device to identify the ship's position at sea. For which of the following activities is this device most likely used?controlguidancepropulsionsuspension
The purpose of thorns on a plant is most likely tohelp the plant to get moisture.anchor the plant in the ground.protect the plant from harm.support the stems and branches.
Which of the following is best classified as a nonrenewable resource?GrassAluminumSunlightOxygen
Which of these are the deepest parts of the ocean?Continental shelvesContinental slopesOcean trenchesAbyssal plains
Which human body system forms a barrier between internal body structures and the external environment?nervousdigestivecirculatoryintegumentary
Decaying plants and animals are important to an ecosystem because theycause disease in living organisms.reduce soil erosion.recycle oxygen to the air.return nutrients to the soil.
The area of a small ocean island is slowly shrinking. This is most likely the result of which occurrence?plant growthbeach erosiondissolving rockfalling water
Which of these will most likely result from small meteoroids entering the atmosphere of Earth?a decrease in air temperaturethe appearance of shooting starsan decrease in atmospheric ozonethe appearance of the Northern Lights
A main advantage to organisms that reproduce sexually isbeing able to conserve energy.having large numbers of offspring.greater genetic diversity.longer life spans.
A pan containing hot water is left on the counter and becomes cool mainly due towater molecules moving apart.cold air penetrating the hot water.heat from the water moving into the cooler air.hot water reacting with the metal pan.
James placed a breath mint and a lump of toothpaste in a cup of water and let it sit overnight. Which statement best explains why the breath mint was gone the following morning, but the toothpaste was still at the bottom of the cup?The breath mint was less soluble than the toothpaste.The breath mint was more soluble than the toothpaste.The breath mint had a lower density than the toothpaste.The breath mint had a greater density than the toothpaste.
Which is an inherited characteristic on a horse?a long manea steel shoea missing tootha bruised leg
Scientists classify matter into various groups. Which group is typically described by the characteristics listed below? • usually solid at room temperature • can be bent or changed in shape without breaking • show a shiny luster when scratched or polishedmetalsnonmetalselementscompounds
Sound waves travel the fastest through dense materials. Through which of these would sound waves travel the SLOWEST?airglassmetalwater
A student dissolves a spoonful of sugar in a glass of water and makes asolute.solvent.solution.suspension.
Many scientists are convinced that an increase of certain gases in the atmosphere is affecting global temperatures. What makes this hypothesis difficult to prove?Trees absorb these gases.Global temperatures are rising.Many variables affect global temperatures.Many human activities produce these gases.
How can the rate of an infectious disease be drastically reduced?by taking medication dailyby preventing transmission between peopleby wearing clean clothing dailyby performing dental hygiene three times each day
Which is needed to determine the amount of gravitational force between two objects?weight and timedistance and massvolume and massarea and weight
Which tool, when properly used, would best help a student classify a basket of apples into groups based on mass?balancethermometermeter stickgraduated cylinder
Ice cubes are an example of which form of water?GasLiquidSolidNatural
Which explains how the epithelium offers protection to land-dwelling vertebrates?Epithelium provides a rigid shell to prevent punctures.Epithelium has capillaries to resist iron deficiency.Epithelium insulates the vertebrate from hypothermia.Epithelium prevents dehydration in vertebrates.
Which is the most likely way a scientist collects data during an experiment?calculatorgraphsobservationscomputer
Which must be present in order for something to be classified as an organism?nucleusorgancellorganelle
Which mineral is most likely to be found in all of the three major rock types known as metamorphic, igneous, and sedimentary?halitequartzgypsumsulfur
A student rubs her hands together on a cold winter day. The heat that warms her hands is produced byfrictiongravitylightmagnetism
When ocean waters become too warm, some whales travel to colder water. This movement is an example ofnest buildinghuntingmigratinghibernating
Students visit an aquarium and watch how an octopus behaves in its tank. Which behavior did the octopus most likely learn from its aquarium environment?waiting to be fed at the aquarium doorcatching food using its armsbeing more active at nighthiding behind rocks
The main function of a fish's fins is to help the fishreproduceseebreathemove
Stars appear to be blue, white, yellow, and red, even without the aid of a telescope. What causes the different colors of the stars?the surface temperaturethe distance from Earththe distance from the Sunthe gases that compose the star
What keeps the planets in orbit around the Sun?air resistancefrictiongravitymagnetism
Use the information below to answer the question. Cotton is a plant product used to make fabric. Cotton is made of cellulose, a fiber not digestible by humans. Cellulose is composed of many sugar molecules bonded together into long chains. Each sugar molecule contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. When cotton fabric is washed, wrinkles often form. The clothing industry uses chemicals to manufacture some cotton fabrics that are wrinkle-free. Dyes are also added to color the cellulose fibers in cotton. A feature that is common to both cellulose and sugar is that both aremagneticelementscompoundssoluble in water
Which animal is an example of an annelid?an anteatera honey beea sea staran earthworm
What ALWAYS happens when the nucleotides in a strand of DNA is rearranged?The information on the strand changes.The mass of the strand changes.The organism dies.The organism thrives.
The surface of Earth is composed of large tectonic plates that are constantly shifting as they float on top of molten rock. Which process must occur in the mantle to make the plates move?normal faultingseafloor spreadingigneous intrusionsconvection currents
Which set of tools would be best to use for dissecting in a biology lab?pen, paper, and a computerscissors, forceps, and a scalpelpetri dish, flask, and a Bunsen burnerglass slides, dye, and a light microscope
Which of these moves in a regular path around the Sun?a planeta constellationa meteora star
Which would best allow a species to survive environmental changes?similar physical featureslow mutation ratesmall populationgenetic diversity
An electrical component that has a continuous path for electrons to flow is calleda closed circuit.an open circuit.a filament.a battery.
In certain areas, tectonic plates move over hot spots. Which landforms are most likely associated with these hot spots?trenchesvolcanoesisland arcsmid-ocean ridges
Which tools are used to determine the boiling point of water?hot plate and stopwatchthermometer and balancehot plate and thermometerbalance and graduated cylinder
A substance that carries sound waves is calleda fulcrum.a medium.a spectrum.an equilibrium.
Which force causes a bicycle to slow down when the brakes are used?frictionelectricitygravitymagnetism
The ichthyornis was a type of bird that lived over 65 million years ago. It lived near the sea and hunted for fish over the water. Fossils have been found in Kansas, many miles from the present-day ocean. Which cause of extinction is most likely to be found in the fossil record along with ichthyornis fossils?changes in the environmentdiseases causing illnesschanges in the weatherpredator animals
Indigo buntings are birds that nest in Florida during the summer. Male buntings are bright blue in color while females are a dull brown. How does the dull brown color of the female buntings help the species survive?It helps male birds find a mate.It helps the birds find food more easily.It helps hide the birds while they sit on their nests.It helps the birds find the flock when migrating.
Which of these things will dissolve in water?iron filingswood chipssandsugar
Students combined baking soda and vinegar to demonstrate a chemical reaction. What indicates that a chemical reaction occurred?the formation of bubblesa reduction in total massthe disappearance of atomsan increase in the number of atoms
The loudness of sound can be changed bydecreasing the pitch.increasing the frequency.increasing the amplitude.decreasing the wavelength.
A mineral sample is obtained from a box, and acid is dropped on the sample to determine if it bubbles. Which best describes what should be done with the mineral after testing it?Return the mineral to its box.Rinse the mineral with water, dry it, and return it to the box.Wipe the mineral with a paper towel and return it to the box.Put the mineral in the sink and leave it for the teacher to clean up.
At what temperature does water begin to boil?0°C32°C100°C212°C
Rosa and Ted ate granola bars before competing in a swimming competition. Less than 50% of the chemical energy in the granola bars was converted to mechanical energy during the swim competition. If all the energy in the granola bars was used, which most likely happened to the rest of the energy?It was lost as potential energy.It was lost as chemical energy.It was converted to thermal energy.It was converted to magnetic energy.
What is the primary energy source driving circulation of ocean currents on Earth?geothermal heatingplanetary rotationsolar heatinglunar tidal forces
Which statement best explains why the force of a hurricane diminishes as the hurricane moves over land?A high pressure area develops.The sea level rises on the coast.The winds start to spin clockwise.The supply of warm, moist air decreases.
n 1931, Barbara McClintock discovered that genes could change position on a chromosome. In corn plants, if a certain gene was moved next to the gene that controls kernel color, the kernels in an ear of corn were various colors. Which statement best supports McClintock's discovery?Genes control inherited traits in organisms.Corn plants can reproduce in laboratory environments.Chromosomes can move around in the nucleus of a cell.Genes are able to disappear and reappear in later generations.
The breaking of a mineral into small, flat sheets is known asluster.streak.cleavage.hardness.
Which location on Earth receives the most direct sunlight?the desertsthe South Polethe equatorthe Western Hemisphere
All living things are made up of prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. Which function is found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?aerobic respirationsexual reproductionprotein productionnitrogen fixation
Jamal lives in the Northern Hemisphere. Which season is it when the Northern Hemisphere is pointed away from the Sun?fallspringsummerwinter
What is an energy change that takes place in a light bulb?Chemical energy changes to light energy.Chemical energy changes to heat energy.Electrical energy changes to light energy.Electrical energy changes to chemical energy.
When an electric fan is running, most of the incoming electrical energy changes into which kind of energy?heat energylight energymechanical energysound energy
Which trait does a cactus seedling inherit from its parents?the amount of water it absorbsthe length of its spinesthe type of organism that pollinates its flowersthe number of organisms that consume its fruit
The freezing point of nitrous oxide is -91°C. Which of the following statements best describes the effect on the particles in liquid nitrous oxide as its temperature is lowered to -91°C?The speed of the particles decreases.The particles begin to move in a straight line.The particles begin to move with a greater force.The motion of the particles becomes more random.
Which of the following will absorb heat energy?two sticks being rubbed togethera piece of wood burningsteel wool rustingice cubes melting
Which behavior will best help a student stay healthy?watching television five hours a daysleeping three hours each nighteating fruits and vegetables each dayexercising once a month
Which of these includes Earth?the asteroid beltthe Andromeda Galaxythe solar systemthe Eagle Nebula
The vertical axis on a graph is the y-axis. What is most likely placed along the y-axis?element symbolsnegative numbersdependent variablesindependent variables
Monica learned that humans are born knowing how to do some things and they learn how to do other things. Which is a behavior humans learn?blinkingbreathingcryingswimming
Which factor will cause a decrease in the force of attraction between two magnets?increasing the size of the two magnetsincreasing the distance between the two magnetschanging the color of the two magnetschanging the texture of the two magnets
What event occurs because of the rotation of Earth?tidesfour seasonsnight and daychanges in the weather
The identifying characteristic of an element is its number ofprotons.neutrons.electrons.orbitals.
A species of wasp lays its eggs in the larva of another insect. The wasp is a parasite, and the larva is the host. What is the relationship between the parasite and the host?Both the parasite and the host benefit.Both the parasite and the host are harmed.The parasite benefits and the host is harmed.The parasite is harmed and the host benefits.
Which structural characteristic is present in a paramecium that is not present in an amoeba?pelliclecell wallcytoplasmcytoskeleton
The structures in the bodies of many organisms have levels of organization that help the body to carry out life processes. Which list correctly shows how these levels are organized from the simplest to the most complex?tissue, cell, organ, organ systemorgan, cell, organ system, tissuecell, tissue, organ, organ systemorgan system, tissue, organ, cell
Which safety gear are most important to wear when working near an open flame?lab apron and gogglessunglasses and thermal glovesrubber shoes and sunglassesthermal gloves and goggles
Recycling is important to the environment because itis a good way to earn money.produces more carbon dioxide for plants.decreases the amount of natural resources.is a way of conserving nonrenewable resources.
Jamil studied how the position of Earth around the Sun affects the energy available on Earth. Which best explains why a particular place on Earth receives more energy during summer months than winter months?the tilt of Earththe rotation of Earththe distance between Earth and the Sunthe amount of rays produced by the Sun
Shale is a common sedimentary rock. Which of these was required to form shale?evaporatingcondensingmeltingcompacting
In the water cycle, rain, snow, or sleet falling to the ground is a form ofprecipitation.condensation.evaporation.transpiration.
Cells perform many different processes that an organism needs to survive and grow. Which is the main function of the process of cellular respiration?the production of sugarthe release of energythe formation of new proteins for the cellthe removal of waste products from the cell
A student places soil in a plastic container to make a home for some worms. The student cuts holes in the top of the container because the worms needspace to moveair to breathesunlight to growsound to communicate
If it is determined that the particles in one solid are arranged in a repeating pattern and the particles in another solid are arranged randomly, what must be true about the solids?They are different substances.They have the same weight.They have the same densities.They are different mixtures.
When manned space exploration began, NASA used the gravity assist concept so that spacecraft could conserve fuel. Which statement explains why the gravity assist concept was useful for spacecraft to successfully travel and return to Earth?It gave spacecraft a timed trajectory.It ensured spacecraft would return home safely.It was helpful in planning spacecraft trajectories.It ensured spacecraft would avoid being pulled into the sun.
In which of the following organs is an acid produced?esophaguslarge intestinesmall intestinestomach
It took Stephen 12 seconds to run across a grass field. Which additional information does he need in order to calculate his acceleration during the run?the direction he ran and the average speedthe distance he ran and the average velocitythe beginning speed and the direction he ranthe beginning velocity and the ending velocity
What are two of Earth's natural resources?nuclear power plants and batteriesforests and nuclear power plantsbatteries and waterfallsforests and waterfalls
In New England, there are noticeable patterns of seasonal change. Which information could you collect to BEST illustrate this change?air temperaturewind speedamount of precipitationnumber of cloudy days
Volume and mass are properties offrictionlightmattersound
Which of the following do water (H2O), rust (Fe2O3), and salt (NaCl) have in common?Water, rust, and salt are atoms.Water, rust, and salt are mixtures.Water, rust, and salt are elements.Water, rust, and salt are compounds.
Which of these careers would a student studying biotechnology most likely pursue?electrical engineeringastronomyagricultural researchgeology
The first person to introduce the idea of the continents moving around the surface of Earth wasNiels Bohr.Albert Einstein.Charles Darwin.Alfred Wegener.
The cells of organisms found in the phylum Porifera (sponges) are not organized into tissues. What structures are absent in organisms belonging to the phylum Porifera?organellescellsgenesorgans
A class wanted to see which paper airplane design could fly the farthest. In order to have the most accurate results, every student shoulduse the same size of paper.buy the same color of paper.fold the paper the same way.decorate the paper the same way.
The following advertisement was placed in the window of a camping supply store. "The double-thermal 'Polar Snooze' sleeping bag is here! It will keep you warm for winter camping!" Based on this advertisement, the best conclusion about Polar Snooze sleeping bags is that theyare lightweight.have insulation.make winter camping easy.cost less than other sleeping bags.
About how long does it take for Earth to make one revolution around the Sun?one dayone weekone monthone year
Twins are born. One is a boy and one is a girl. Which statement is correct about their genetic makeup?The boy and girl inherit genetic material from the father only.The boy and girl inherit genetic material from the mother only.The boy and girl inherit genetic material from both parents.The boy inherits genetic material from the father only and the girl inherits it from the mother only.
Which particles are responsible for the electric charge of an atom?protons and neutronsprotons and electronsneutrons and moleculesmolecules and electrons
Which is the best source of vitamins and minerals?fruits and vegetablesbread, rice, and pastamilk and milk productsmeat, fish, and poultry
Copper wire is often wrapped in plastic. Plastic material is a goodelectromagnetinsulatorcircuitcurrent
Teresa is making a list of the similarities and differences between a euglena and a volvox cell. In which way is the euglena different from the volvox cell?A euglena can respond to light.A euglena can live in fresh water.A euglena can regulate water intake.A euglena can only reproduce asexually.
If the body takes in more food than it uses.breathing becomes faster.weight is lost.the heart rate increases.the food is stored as fat.
The mass of an object is measured using which unit?litergrammeteryard
The Sun transforms matter into energy through nuclear fusion. What can be inferred about the Sun from this fact?The Sun is losing mass and hydrogen.The Sun is losing volume and hydrogen.The Sun is losing mass and helium.The Sun is losing volume and helium.
Which job is done in Virginia only during the fall season?Picking applesFeeding animalsSelling clothesBuilding houses
A scientist is studying the effect of acid rain on oak trees. Of the numbers below, which would be the number of oak trees the scientist should use to obtain the most reliable data?1220200
Camouflage MOST helps an animal with which of these life needs?Finding shelterHiding from predatorsGathering enough foodRaising young
There are a variety of events that can disrupt ecosystems. Some events result in local disturbances and others can affect a much larger area. Which event would most likely result in change on a global scale?land scarred by forest fireserosion of ocean shorelinesconverging plate boundariesdestruction of tropical rain forests
A hardware designer finds that the wiring in a circuit is releasing enough heat to make the circuit dangerously hot. Which change would best solve this problem?increasing the current in the circuitplacing rubber insulation on wires in the circuitreversing the direction of current flow in the circuitusing circuit wires with a lower resistance
There are different kinds of muscles in the human body. Each muscle is formed from a group of cells that works together. The main function of a group of muscle cells is tomake oxygen.release energy.digest nutrients.cause movement.
Four objects are on a wooden ramp. Which object is most likely to roll off the ramp if it is pushed gently?flat eraserround ballbent paper clipwooden cube
When zinc and copper are melted together, brass is formed. Brass is an example ofa solute.an element.a mineral.a mixture.
Choose the investigation that would best answer the question: Does the length of a string change how fast a pendulum swings?Tie identical weights to two strings of different lengths.Tie two different weights to a string.Tie identical weights to a long string.Tie two different weights to two identical strings.
Meiosis is necessary for which reproductive event to occur?vegetative buddingbinary fissioncloningfertilization
Some astronauts may spend several months in space orbiting Earth. Where do these astronauts most likely stay while in space?on a space stationin a space shuttleon a space probein a lunar module
Which is a possible consequence of global warming?an increase in the amount of coral reefsa decrease in temperature, causing earlier frostsan increase in the number of heat waves, causing droughtsa decrease in temperature, causing shorter growing seasons
A brown bear eats a variety of foods including berries, insects, and small animals. Which best describes a brown bear?producerherbivorecarnivoreomnivore
In which part of a plant cell does photosynthesis occur?nucleuschloroplastcell membranecell wall
Which alternative energy resource adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere?nuclear energybiofuel energywind energygeothermal energy
Energy from the Sun changes a liquid to a gas by the process ofcondensation.evaporation.freezing.melting.
Which of the following is a result of the tilt of Earth's axis?seasonal changeshours in a dayheights of tidesmoon phases
Chloroplasts absorb light energy. The function of the chloroplast is tosynthesize sugars.synthesize proteins.transform sugar into cellular energy.transform proteins into useful nutrients.
When water changes from a liquid to a gas and then the steam condenses back to the liquid form, these types of changes arephysical.chemical.electrical.mechanical.
What direction is the movement of the energy in a food web?consumer to producerproducer to consumerdecomposer to producerdecomposer to consumer
When the velocity of an ocean wave decreases as it approaches a shore, what happens to the wave?Its height increases.Its height decreases.Its length shortens.It crests.
Which is a force that keeps Earth in orbit around the Sun?frictiongravityradiationmagnetism
Substances enter any plant or animal cell by passing through which of the following structures?nucleuscell membranevacuolechloroplast
Many years ago, purple dye was made from some sea animals. Then, in 1856, William Perkins tried to make a new medicine. Instead, he found a way to make purple dye from coal. What is a positive effect of his discovery?Some diseases can be treated.Purple clothing can be made.Sea animals are not needed to make purple dye.Perkins is famous for discovering a new medicine.
When magnesium (Mg) metal is burned in the presence of oxygen (O?), magnesium oxide (MgO) is produced. The properties of magnesium oxide are different than the individual properties of magnesium and oxygen because magnesium oxide isa solution.a mixture.a compound.an element.
Fossils of sea animals were found in a cave in Arkansas. What does this mean about that area of Arkansas in the past?It was once underwater.It was once much warmer.It has become a rockier place.It has changed little from then.
Which instrument would be best for measuring the volume of a pebble?metric rulerstopwatchtriple beam balancegraduated cylinder
Which of these is a waste product of plant cells?mineralsoxygenheatwater
It can take millions of years for fossil fuels to form. These fossil fuels form underground from decaying plants and animals. Which term best describes a fossil fuel?a source of solar powera source of electrical powera source of renewable energya source of nonrenewable energy
Earth's hydrosphere is best described as therelatively thin layer of rock found above Earth's mantlerelatively thin layer of water covering most of Earth's crusthot liquid rock located in Earth's outer corevery dense rock located in Earth's inner core
When riding a roller coaster, an electric motor pulls the roller coaster to the top of the first hill. What force pulls the roller coaster down the hill?frictionspeedgravitymass
Which of these organisms is classified as a decomposer?hawkmushroommousegrass
A cold-blooded vertebrate with smooth skin belongs to what class of animals?reptilefishamphibianmammal
Which of these best describes a tornado?A winter storm that produces frozen precipitationA rotating funnel-shaped cloud with strong winds and thunderstormsA severe weather condition with low temperatures and blowing snowA storm that forms over warm ocean water and has extremely strong winds
Plants use carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during the process ofrespiration.fertilization.evaporation.photosynthesis.
A reverse fault occurs when one side of a fault plane is driven up over the other side. Reverse faults can cause which of these landforms?deltasmountainsdunesislands
A student is collecting water samples. The student needs a container that holds water, will not break easily, and can be used many times. Which of the following containers will best meet the student's needs?a glass jara paper cupa wooden boxa plastic bottle
What condition is most likely to spread an illness between people?a virus suspended in the airan accident on a playgrounda genetic mutation in somatic cellsan occurrence of acid rain
When scientists proposed the Theory of Continental Drift, there were many skeptics. Which discovery confirmed that the continents move on plates?deep-sea currentsearthquake formationspreading of the sea floorsedimentary rocks
Which two things are produced when a plant breaks down sugar to release energy?carbon dioxide and wateroxygen and carbon dioxidecarbon dioxide and foodoxygen and food
A scientist wants to track contaminant movement in the Gulf Stream. The Gulf Stream is a warm water current in the North Atlantic Ocean and is part of the North Atlantic gyre. The gyre is influenced by the Coriolis effect. To follow the contaminant after it exits the Gulf Stream, the scientist needs to know characteristics of the North Atlantic gyre. Which of these best describes a movement of the North Atlantic gyre the scientist needs to know?linear movement due westlinear movement due southclockwise movementcounterclockwise movement
The growing human population has many practices that adversely impact the environment. Acid rain is one example of environmental damage that is related to human activities. Which human activity is most likely the largest contributor to acid rain?burning fossil fuels in power plantsusing pesticides on agricultural cropsdumping waste matter into ocean watersclearing native forests for industrialization
What happens to the water vapor in an air mass as it ascends?It freezes.It condenses.It vaporizes.It polarizes.
Which two terms are used to describe weather?wind direction and amount of erosiongravity and amount of raingroundwater and cloud coverair temperature and wind speed
In what unit of time does Earth orbit the Sun?daymonthyearcentury
While conducting an experiment on gravity, what will be needed to ensure the safety of students?quiet zonesdrop zonesheavy objectsfrictionless surfaces
All of the populations of species in an area make up aregionnichefamilycommunity
Cell division is necessary for an organism toobtain nutrients.grow and reproduce.make proteins.conserve matter and energy.
A large plant population may impose selective pressure on a smaller, isolated group of plants, resulting in a change in allele distribution. Which mechanism is responsible for this change in the allele distribution?mutationhybridizationgenetic drifttrait acquisition
Two samples of gold must have the samemass.volume.length.density.
A student organizes a list of the distances that five students ran in 10 minutes. Another way to best organize this data is by using apie graph.bar graph.line graph.pictograph.
What is the dependent variable in this experiment?type of soil usedamount of water usedlength of sunlight exposuregrowth of the bean plants
Electricity is produced in a hydroelectric plant when moving water turns a turbine. Which describes this energy transformation from the turning turbine to electricity?kinetic energy into electric energynuclear energy into electric energythermal energy into electric energychemical energy into electric energy
When a star explodes, an intensely bright object is formed. What is the name of this object?novared giantsupernovawhite dwarf
The Earth's equator receives more direct sunlight than the regions to its north and south. This distribution of sunlight accounts directly for which phenomenon?The westward deflection of equatorial winds.The movement of rising air currents away from the equator.The rotation of storm systems.The formation of calm "eyes" in the centers of cyclones.
The class puts the planters by the window so that the plants can get more sunlight. How do the tomato plants use sunlight?to make sugar in the leavesto use starch from the stemsto move water to the flowersto get nutrients through the roots
Which of these is the most serious impact to an ecosystem after a tornado?an increase in biodiversitysoil erosion along with water pollutionthe growth of plants in newly cleared areasanimals relocating to different habitats
Gravity is responsible for the ___.orbits of the planets around the Sunrotation of a planet on its axistilt of Earth's axisphases of the Moon
Some runners ate pasta before a race. The pasta was broken down into simple sugars and was absorbed by the blood stream. What body system was responsible for breaking down the pasta into small nutrients for use in the cells of the runners?the nervous systemthe digestive systemthe excretory systemthe endocrine system
Which crustal feature forms when two continental plates collide?trenchesrift zonestidal zonesmountain ranges
At which location does the movement of tectonic plates form isolated volcanic islands, such as Hawaii?transform boundarydivergent boundarysubduction zonehot spot
Which current property of our solar system is mainly due to solar emissions occurring soon after the initiation of fusion in the Sun's core?directions of revolution of the planetsdirections of rotation of the planetsdistribution of moons among the planetsdistribution of elements among the planets
Water puddles on a sidewalk evaporate when the Sun heats the water. Which of these best describes what is happening as the water evaporates?Water changes phase as it releases heat to the environment.Water boils as it absorbs energy from the sidewalk.Water becomes a gas as it absorbs energy from the Sun.Water evaporates as its thermal energy is transferred to the air.
Clara says that her school is in a desert. Which fact about her schoolyard most helps her claim?The schoolyard has few trees.The schoolyard has rocks and sand.The schoolyard gets warm in the summer.The schoolyard gets little rain during the year.
What process is most responsible for the extinction of most species of plants and animals that have lived on Earth?gene mutationenvironmental changesselective breedingdecrease in reproduction
The scientific method is the inquiry process by which scientists raise and attempt to answer new questions. Which is the best way to communicate findings that result from scientific inquiry?discuss the findings with scientists who agree with youdiscuss the findings with a well-known scientistpublish the findings in scientific journalspublish the findings in local newspapers
Trevor turns on a lamp. When the lamp is on, electrical energy changes into which other form of energy?chemicallightmechanicalpotential
People often wear sunglasses in polar regions because most of the sunlight that strikes a snow-covered surface isreflectedabsorbedrefractedtransmitted
A plant is discolored and has large brown blotches on its leaves. This condition is most likely caused bypollination.photosynthesis.nourishment.disease.
Which is a characteristic of sedimentary rock?forms in layerslooks very shinycontains crystalsforms from magma
Which gas is transported by the circulatory system in humans and is used by cells during respiration to release energy stored in food?carbon dioxidenitrogenhydrogenoxygen
Which of the following planets has the shortest orbit around the Sun?EarthMarsMercuryVenus
Rivers leave behind small pieces of rocks after they flood. These small pieces of rock form a floodplain. Which words best describe a floodplain?flat landsmany sinkholesrugged peakslong rows of ridges
Some scientists believe that the mass extinction of dinosaurs was caused by the impact of a large meteorite on Earth. This impact would have caused a darkening of the sky due to dust blown into the upper atmosphere. This darkening would have reduced the sizes of some ecosystems because oflonger seasons.accelerated erosion.reduced photosynthesis.increased number of hurricanes.
Which material is the best conductor of electricity?metalglasswoodplastic
Which is an example of a nonliving thing?birdinsectdogwater
What is a characteristic of sedimentary rock?high hardnessglassy texturecontains fossilsshiny silver luster
Rock that is made of material that has settled to the bottom of lakes and oceans and been compressed and hardened isconglomerate rockvolcanic rocksedimentary rockmetamorphic rock
Which are caused by the Coriolis Effect?tornadoesvolcanoeswind patternsstationary fronts
Which of the following compounds is most likely to be part of living organisms?C?H??O?BF?MoCl?CsI
The Sun produces energy throughchemical reactions.fission of uranium.nuclear fusion.volcanic eruptions.
Which device is used to determine the volume of a liquid?anemometergraduated cylindertest tubethermometer
Mrs. Garry's class wants to know if their area has more acid rain than other parts of the state. Which would be the best way for them to begin research?contact other schools within the statestudy science textbooks in the librarylook for current acid rain studies on the Internetexamine soil samples taken at different locations
Which illustrates the correct order of relationships in organisms?tissue -> organ system -> organ -> cellorgan -> cell -> organ system -> tissuecell -> tissue -> organ -> organ systemorgan system -> organ -> cell -> tissue
Which is evidence that the universe is expanding?the presence of dark matterred shift of light from distant galaxiesconstant speed of light from every perspectiveemission of high-energy gamma rays by distant objects
Which of these statements is true about the parts that make up the atom?Protons are larger than neutrons.Electrons have a positive charge.Electrons are inside the nucleus.Neutrons have no charge.
A certain fossil (Y) is found in a layer of rock that lies between two index fossils, X and Z. Surprisingly, the older of the index fossils (Z) is found above the other fossils, suggesting that the rock layer has overturned. Which dating method is best to confirm the rock layer has overturned by determining the ages of these fossils?anatomical comparisongene sequencingradiometric analysisfossil depth measurement
Which items would be most useful at home during a power failure?flashlights and extra batterieshats and sunscreenraincoats and umbrellasinsect spray and jackets
Energy flows in an ecosystem through food webs. Which form of energy is the least available for reuse in a food web?heat energysunlight energyenergy from producersenergy from consumers
Which of the following fasteners are best to use to fasten the sides of a wooden birdhouse?boltshooksnailspins
In areas where a lot of earthquakes occur, architects are designing buildings with the ability to move with the land. How are the new building designs most likely to help people?The new designs can help save lives.The new designs are more attractive.The new designs cost less to make.The new designs are much taller.
In which form is most of the energy released from gasoline when burned by an automobile?heat energynuclear energysolar energysound energy
Heart disease can result in a reduced amount of oxygen moving properly through the body. Which body system does heart disease most directly affect?skeletalexcretorycirculatorynervous
The oil used today is made from the ancient remains of tiny sea creatures called "Diatoms." When they were alive, the Diatoms converted sunlight into stored energy. Based on this information, which of the following statements is true?The Sun turned diatoms into oil after 10-20 years.Diatoms are the original source of energy for oil.The Sun is the original source of energy for oil.Diatoms converted oil into energy.
Skunks spray a strong-smelling liquid to ___.get rid of wastesattract preydefend themselveshelp nearby plants grow
Which is an example of mechanical weathering?a rockslidea volcano eruptingan earthquake occurringa rock freezing and thawing
Recycling newspapers is good for the environment because itincreases the need for trees.helps conserve resources.increases the need for landfills.helps remove pollutants from the air.
Rocks and minerals are common materials found on Earth. Which property do most rocks and minerals share?They are pure.They are solid.They are liquid.They are magnetic.
Which organs belong to the lymphatic system?lungs, tracheaspleen, thymuskidneys, bladderpancreas, pituitary gland
The hardness, odor, and taste of an object can all bemeasured with a metric rulermeasured with a spring scaleobserved with the sensesobserved with a hand lens
A bird called a ptarmigan has feathered feet. The feathers on the feet of the ptarmigan are most helpful when this bird ___.digs up foodwalks in deep snowclimbs rocky cliffsruns under bushes
What is responsible for changing the remains of prehistoric sea animals into natural gas?timewatergravitypressure
Which is a basic structure found in all living organisms?cellorgancompoundelement
To calculate the relative age of rocks, geologists use the rate of radioactive decay of isotopes present in their samples. What is the term used for the original amount of the elemental isotopes being investigated?rare earth isotopesson isotopesdaughter isotopesparent isotopes
An echo is a sound wave that has beenabsorbed.refracted.scattered.reflected.
The central nervous system consists of two parts: the brain and thesenses.organs.muscles.spinal cord.
A small town is building their first water treatment plant. Their primary disinfectant is UV radiation. Which contaminant will UV radiation eliminate?bacteriametalssedimentoil
Which of the following must be included with magnitude to represent a vector?massdirectionaccelerationvolume
What does a fire take away from a forest that squirrels need to survive?food and soilfood and shelterwater and soilwater and shelter
Nitrogen, a nutrient found in fertilizer, helps plants increase in size. Rainwater runoff often carries fertilizer into ponds and lakes. What effect does excess nitrogen have on organisms in a pond or lake ecosystem?Algae grows rapidly.Mutations occur gradually in fish.Clam shells are slowly weakened.Frogs adapt quickly to new food sources.
Which measurement is the most accurate way to describe the distance between the Sun and its nearest neighboring star?4 light-years400 light-years4 billion kilometers400 billion kilometers
Which four elements make up most of the human body?oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogensilicon, calcium, oxygen, aluminumcarbon, sodium, hydrogen, oxygensulfur, phosphorous, calcium, nitrogen
An area is semiarid, has few trees, and is home to ground-nesting birds. This area is most likely part of which biome?tundrataigagrasslanddesert
Which organisms make energy available to all other organisms in a food chain?producersdecomposersconsumersscavengers
Which of these substances is correctly identified as a mineral?coalquartzgranitesandstone
Two objects are at rest and are 1.0 meter apart. To reduce the gravitational pull between the two objects, they should bestacked vertically.placed side by side.moved 0.5 meter apart.moved 1.5 meters apart.
Soil color is closely related to its content. Which element causes soil to appear red?ironsiliconcalciummagnesium
Which particles make up the mass of an atom?protons and neutronsprotons and electronsneutrons and moleculeselectrons and molecules
Auroras occur where Earth's magnetosphere traps high-energy particles in which region of the atmosphere?tropospherestratospherethermosphereexosphere
An experiment was performed at sea-level. 400 mL of water was put in 4 different-shaped containers and placed on hot plates with 4 different temperature settings as shown below. Beaker - 110°C Petri dish - 95°C Erlenmeyer flask - 60°C Round bottom bowl - 45°C Which characteristic of water remained the same in each container?the shape of the waterthe rate of evaporationthe boiling point of waterthe amount of steam released per minute
In plants, what is responsible for passing traits from one generation to the next?chloroplastsphotosynthesisrootsgenes
Which safety measure should a student take when handling a microscope?clean the lenses with your fingerskeep switching the magnificationscarry the microscope with two hands at all timesmake sure to put the microscope on an uneven surface
Which statement best describes the size of the Sun?The Sun is medium-sized compared to other stars.The Sun is the largest and brightest star in the universe.Most of the stars in the universe would fit inside the Sun.Most of the stars in the universe are smaller than the Sun.
A wetland was drained to build a mall. Two years later, there were no more toads in that area. Why did the toads disappear?The toads were destroyed by the construction equipment.The toads died because toads cannot breathe out of water.The toads were frightened and went into the woods.The toads got their food from the wetland ecosystem.
Technological advances are allowing scientists to develop methods for replacing abnormal human genes with healthy copies of the same genes. Which is the most likely use for this gene therapy?killing viruseshealing woundstreatment of airborne infectionstreatment of inherited diseases
Which statement about plant and animal cells is true?Both have a cell wall to give them support.Both have a large vacuole to store water.Both use mitochondria to produce energy.Both use chloroplasts to store energy.
Finding fossils of warm-weather plants in the rock layers of a cold northern island suggests thatthe plants used to be harvested for food.the island used to be located farther south.the climate of the island used to be warmer.the fossils used to be more resistant to cold.
The hereditary material in corn plants can be altered by scientists so the plants produce more corn. Which term identifies this process?environmental degradationecological successionnatural selectiongenetic engineering
What is the main function of red blood cells?To fight disease in the bodyTo carry oxygen to all parts of the bodyTo remove carbon monoxide from all parts of the bodyTo produce materials which cause the blood to clot.
Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur both on land and in water. Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions most often occurnear plate boundarieson large pieces of landin large bodies of waterin regions near the equator
An earthworm has a length of 12.8 centimeters. What is the length, in millimeters, of the earthworm?0.128 millimeter1.28 millimeters128 millimeters1280 millimeters
Which material has the least resistance to the flow of electricity?rubberaluminumgranitewood
Which are replenished more quickly than they are used?energy resourcesmaterial resourcesrenewable resourcesnonrenewable resources
What is the first thing a student should do before starting an experiment?read all the directionsfind a lab partnermake notes about observationswrite a report on the investigation
Which of the following parts of the human body is most complex?heartkidneywhite blood cellcentral nervous system
The Wright Brothers' invention has had the greatest impact ontransportation.communication.mass production.space exploration.
Which best describes how earthworms improve soil as they eat dead plant material?They make the soil clean.They keep disease out of the soil.They recycle nutrients into the soil.They remove extra water from the soil.
Use the information below to answer the question. Cotton is a plant product used to make fabric. Cotton is made of cellulose, a fiber not digestible by humans. Cellulose is composed of many sugar molecules bonded together into long chains. Each sugar molecule contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. When cotton fabric is washed, wrinkles often form. The clothing industry uses chemicals to manufacture some cotton fabrics that are wrinkle-free. Dyes are also added to color the cellulose fibers in cotton. How would a clothing manufacturer separate colors to determine the purity of the dyes?through filtrationby their boiling pointsby their freezing pointsthrough paper chromatography
What property of water is most important for living organisms?It is odorless.It does not conduct electricity.It is tasteless.It is liquid at most temperatures on Earth.
An astronomer and a marine biologist were having lunch and discussing their current experiments. They discovered that although they investigate different areas of science, they most likely use the samescientific tools used in experiments.publications for conducting research.scientific method to test hypotheses.locations for conducting their experiments.
Fossil fuels are formedin shallow areas over short periods of time.from the remains of organisms.in underground reservoirs that are relatively cool.by high winds and temperatures.
Which had the greatest impact on the way humans heat their homes?Newton's theory of gravityMendel's experiments with pea plantsFranklin's experiments with electricityDarwin's research on the Galapagos islands
Use the information below to answer the question. Many people are concerned that the reduction in the number of acres of forested area on Earth will lead to a large reduction in the amount of oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. If this happens, an organism's ability to breathe would be affected. The effect would be similar to moving the organism fromsea level to a mountaintop.sea level to a valley below sea level.a mountaintop to sea level.a beach at sea level to a valley at sea level.
Which of these is an example of a chemical reaction?storing milk by putting it into the freezermilk turning sour when left in a warm placemixing milk into a glass with chocolate powderallowing milk to evaporate, leaving behind powdered milk
Which of these tools is best for recording observations outdoors?a rulera grapha notebooka calculator
Students are investigating the physical properties of three solid mixtures by placing each solid mixture in liquid water. What physical property are the students testing?solubilityconductivityboiling pointmelting point
What remains in the same location in the sky of the Northern Hemisphere each night?the Sunthe Little Dipperthe North Starthe Moon
Which feature makes up most of the surface of Earth?hot gasesdry landcraterswater
Which of these situations would most likely be a result of climate change?weaker storms, causing less shoreline erosionshorter days, causing longer hibernation periodsshrinking glaciers, causing sea levels to riseincreased radioactivity, causing damage to cells
A student performs an investigation using anti-bacterial hand soap. The student washes only his left hand with anti-bacterial soap, but cultures swabs from both hands. The cultures from both hands were incubated at room temperature for 48 hours before being examined. Which best explains the purpose of using soap on only the left hand?to act as a controlled variable for the investigationto act as the dependent variable for the investigationto provide another testable variable for the investigationto serve as the independent variable for the investigation
Raquel fed a litter of five kittens an all-meat diet for two weeks and found that they gained an average of 15 ounces. She concluded that eating meat is the best way to help kittens grow. What should Raquel have done to make this a better experiment?tested five kittens on a non-meat diet alsoweighed the kittens in gramsused only one kittentested dogs as well as cats
In the 1600s a scientist named Anton van Leeuwenhoek worked toward improving microscopes and created his own lenses. With his microscopes, Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria and muscle fibers. Which type of job benefited most from these discoveries?glass makingastronomymedicineteaching
One advantage of a hand lens over a microscope is that the hand lensis easier to carry on field investigations.is less likely to be infected by bacteria.makes very tiny objects appear larger.produces a more accurate image.
Raising livestock, such as sheep and cattle, results in the production of large amounts of methane gas (CH4). Methane has the same effect in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2). As more livestock are raised to provide food for humans, what is the most likely effect of the increase in methane?acid rainozone thinningwater pollutionglobal warming
Which is most directly responsible for building up a river delta?erosionleachingsubsidencedeposition
What explains how day and night occur in different parts of Earth?Earth rotates on its axis.Earth revolves around the Sun.The Sun rotates on its axis.The Sun revolves around the galaxy.
The human body is made up of different levels of organization. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a specific function. Which would be an example of a tissue in the human body?stomachplateletsmusclehair
In the rock cycle, sedimentary rock forms when rock iscrystallized into natural glass.exposed to great temperature.melted into liquid magma.broken down by weathering.
Heating and cooling water change the state of matter of water. What happens when a block of ice is heated to 10° Celsius?It melts to form liquid water.It condenses to form liquid water.It freezes to become heavier ice.It evaporates to become a vapor (gas).
Which situation is the best example of an inherited trait?a boy playing with a balla bird building a nesta horse pulling a wagona dog sitting on command
Physical features help animals survive. Which statement best describes physical adaptations that occur through natural selection in changing environments?They result in population decline.They are all observable in the fossil record.They occur slowly over long periods of time.They are more likely to be observed in plants.
The amount of which greenhouse gas in the air will increase the most if large forests are cut down to be used for building materials without planting new trees in their place?ozonemethanewater vaporcarbon dioxide
A carpenter rubs sandpaper on a wooden bench to make the bench smoother. The sandpaper will get warm as it is rubbed on the bench. As a result of the friction between the sandpaper and the bench, thermal energy is converted tochemical energy that is stored by the sandpaper.radiant energy that is transferred to the bench.potential energy that is stored by the wood.heat energy that is transferred to the air.
What is the green pigment that allows plants to change the Sun's energy into chemical energy?glucosechlorophyllmitochondriaphotosynthesis
Which scientist hypothesized that the environment can affect the characteristics of a species?DarwinEinsteinMendelNewton
Which statement describes the reason why an ice cube melts when set out in a warm room?Heat from the room is absorbed by the ice cube.The ice cube molecules move more slowly.One side of the ice cube is colder than the other.Heat from the ice cube moves into the air.
Two characteristics of the Nevada climate are low humidity and abundant sunshine. This combination of characteristics most likely results inlow altitude fog.rapid evaporation.high elevation snowfall.frequent thunderstorms.
In order to survive, all animals needheat, water, and soilsunlight, soil, and heatsunlight, air, and foodfood, water, and air
Which best explains why population growth can result in water shortages and rationing in certain areas?Aquifers recharge slowly.Lake water is reserved for recreation.Increasing biomass decreases evaporation rates.Tall buildings impede the development of rain clouds.
Professor Walden studies genetics at a local university. She believes that she has discovered information that contradicts a widely accepted theory. As a scientist and leader in the study of genetics, which action should she take?Announce to the world that her theory is better than the old theory.Call the news media and tell them about her new theory.Challenge the old theory with scientific evidence.Request that the old theory be banned.
Canadian physician Sir William Osler once said, "In Science the credit goes to the man who convinces the world, not to the man to whom the idea first occurred." How does this quote apply to scientific knowledge?Famous scientists have the best ideas.Ideas must be communicated to the publicIn order to be important, ideas must be believable.The results are less important than the ideas in an experiment.
Which event or principle cannot have its validity directly tested by laboratory experiment?the Big Bang Theorythe Conservation of Energythe Periodicity of Element Propertiesthe Acceleration of Objects due to Gravity
How do the circulatory system and the respiratory system depend on one another?Oxygen collected by the respiratory system is carried throughout the body by the circulatory system.Solid wastes collected by the circulatory system are carried throughout the body by the respiratory system.Nutrients collected by the respiratory system are carried throughout the body by the circulatory system.Carbon dioxide collected by the circulatory system is carried throughout the body by the respiratory system.
Oxygen and iron combine chemically to form rust. Rust is classified as which of the following?an atoma compoundan elementa mixture
A student made observations of four rock samples. Which of these observations most likely describes a sedimentary rock?Sample 1 has bands of light and dark crystals.Sample 2 has pink, gray, and white crystals grown together.Sample 3 is made up of one huge, pale pink crystal.Sample 4 is made up of layers of sand grains cemented together.
In 1931, Barbara McClintock discovered that genes could change position on a chromosome. In corn plants, if a certain gene was moved next to the gene that controls kernel color, the kernels in an ear of corn were various colors. Which statement best supports McClintock's discovery?Genes control inherited traits in organisms.Corn plants can reproduce in laboratory environments.Chromosomes can move around in the nucleus of a cell.Genes are able to disappear and reappear in later generations.
Herbivores obtain most of their energy byconsuming animalsconsuming plantsproducing sugarabsorbing sunlight
Which factor has the greatest effect on a community's stores of freshwater?the location of the nearest oceanthe average annual rainfallthe location of the nearest mountainthe average winter temperature
A researcher's plan is to place five fish in separate tanks, give them the same amount of food each day, and keep the temperature the same. One fish will be exposed to artificial light for 24 hours each day, while the others will have light for 22 hours and then no light for 2 hours each day. Which is the control for this experiment?the separate tanksthe amount of foodthe fish deprived of lightthe fish exposed to light for 24 hours
Use The Periodic Table of the Elements and the information below to answer the question. Magnesium metal (Mg) is grayish-white in color and reacts actively with water. Fluorine (F2) is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature and is a member of the halogen family. These two elements react to produce magnesium fluoride (MgF2), a chemical commonly used in making windows and lenses. How does adding heat energy affect magnesium fluoride (MgF2) molecules?The motion of the molecules stops.The motion of the molecules increases.The motion of the molecules decreases.The motion of the molecules is at a constant rate.
A shift in climate changes a forested area with little annual snowfall to an area with snowfall most of the year. Natural selection would most likely favor a rabbit with which adaptation?dark coat colorincreased body fatlarge ears to release body heatmore powerful legs for burrowing
When humans move into an area, they sometimes plant grasses, flowers, or trees that are not native to the area. The non-native species sometimes choke out the native species. Which organism would most likely be harmed by a loss of native plants in the area?the fungi that break down dead plantsthe beetles that eat a variety of grass rootsthe mosquitoes that hide under plant leavesthe caterpillars that eat only one type of plant
What is a way of improving air quality?driving large carsbuilding more factoriesburning wood in the fireplaceusing solar energy to produce electricity
Which tool should be used to measure the stem length of a plant?a balancea metric rulera graduated cylindera thermometer
In which of these organs does most absorption of nutrients take place?liverstomachsmall intestinelarge intestine
Proper use and care of a microscope includescarrying it with both hands.reflecting sunlight to the stage.removing the objectives after you are done.adjusting the coarse focus under high power.
All matter is made up ofcellsatomsmoleculescompounds
Which physical change would most likely help an animal survive during the winter?tail gets longerfur gets thickerfeathers are shedwhiskers get shorter
Which of these steps in the rock cycle occurs ONLY in the formation of metamorphic rock?erosioncompactioncementationrecrystallization
A tulip growing in a pot is placed at the center of a table. Which of these nearby objects will the tulip grow toward?a sunny windowan electric heatera large bowl of watera fan blowing gently
Common soaps are often basic. Which of these is a property of a chemical base?sour tastepH equal to 6turns litmus paper blueforms bubbles with limestone
As temperatures increase, which process is responsible for increasing the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere?ionizationevaporationrespirationcondensation
Why do some animals hibernate in the winter?to find food for their youngto adapt to environmental changesto attract a mateto avoid predators
Which wind-water interaction is responsible for cycling nutrient-rich waters from the ocean floor to the sea surface?upwellingstorm surgedownwellingsurface currents
If a cell is exposed to a chemical that inhibits the production of spindle fibers as the cell is preparing for mitosis, what would most likely happen?The cell would continue with mitotic division.The cell would undergo meiotic division.The cell would break open.The cell would not divide.
Norma's flashlight was not working. She replaced the old batteries with new ones, and the flashlight turned on. Why did the flashlight work after she replaced the batteries?because the batteries conduct the electricitybecause the batteries supply the energybecause the batteries produce lightbecause the batteries produce heat
The sun provides heat and light to Earth. The sun is best described asa planet close to Earththe closest star to Eartha planet that reflects lightthe center of the universe
A large piece of ice is placed on the sidewalk on a warm day. What will happen to the ice?It will melt to form liquid water.It will melt to form water vapor.It will freeze to form liquid water.It will not change at all.
Ducks live near ponds and lakes. The shape of a duck's foot helps it swim and walk on muddy ground. Which factor is most important in determining the shape of a baby duck's foot?the shape of the parent ducks' feetthe temperature of the pond waterthe amount of mud in the bottom of the pondthe amount of rain that fell before the duck was born
The Moon revolves around the Earth because of a non-contact force. What force of Earth keeps the Moon in orbit?electrical forcemagnetic forcecentripetal forcegravitational force
Which motion causes the pattern of day and night on Earth?Earth rotates on its axisEarth orbits around the sunthe moon rotates on its axisthe moon orbits around Earth
What causes ocean water to evaporate in the water cycle?energy from the Sunenergy from ocean wavesenergy from Earth's rotationenergy from Earth's moon
Some cells, such as human nerve and muscle cells, contain many more mitochondria than do other cells, such as skin cells. Why do some cells have more mitochondria than others?The cells use more energy.The cells store more nutrients.The cells degrade more proteins.The cells divide more frequently.
A student finds that an unidentified mineral sample can scratch gypsum but is unable to scratch quartz. The student has made an observation about which property of the sample?lusterhardnessdensityreactivity
Which process is the best example of weathering?A cloud releases freezing rain.A tree root breaks apart a rock.Dry weather results in a small harvest.Sediments flow into a bay.
What is the major source of energy for food chains?waterairsunlightgrass
Elias investigates whether soaking beans in water before planting affects how the beans grow. Which beans would most likely be the control group?the beans that were soaked the least amount of timethe beans that were not soaked in waterthe beans that had the greatest massthe beans that grew the tallest
What type of galaxy most likely can be described as a large, flat disk surrounded by arms of stars and dust?ellipticalirregularringspiral
Which is true of a car that is accelerating along a horizontal roadway?Its kinetic energy is increasingIts kinetic energy is decreasing.Its potential energy is increasing.Its potential energy is decreasing.
A hypothesis that is successfully tested many times may become aconclusion.theory.constant.law.
Which of the following do plants need to make their own food?FlowersBacteriaSunlightOxygen
What is the result of the rapid shifting in Earth's surface?a tornadoan earthquakea volcanoan avalanche
Ned learned that light is a source of energy. Which can only result from light energy?an ice cube meltinga rainbow formingwater evaporatingthunder booming
At which location are oceans the deepest?Mid-ocean ridgeAbyssal plainOcean trenchVolcanic island
Kendra's mom is purchasing a car, but cannot decide what color to get. Kendra advises her mom that a car with a black exterior will be uncomfortable in the summer. This observation is correct because dark objects, as compared to lighter colored objects,reduce heat transfer.are generally more dense.absorb more of the Sun's energy.reflect sunlight more efficiently.
Heart cells have fibers that slide up and down and cause contractions. Which types of specialized cells can contract?bone cellsnerve cellsmuscle cellswhite blood cells
What can we learn by studying fossils?how hurricanes formed long agohow the solar system was formedthe cause of strong earthquakeshow Earth's environments have changed
If a string on a musical instrument like a guitar is made tighter, the sound produced by that string will always belower pitched.higher pitched.louder.quieter.
Iron oxide, also known as rust, is formed when iron chemically combines with oxygen. Which term best describes iron oxide?elementmixturesolutioncompound
Which is a trait that a child can inherit from its parents?eye colora broken leglength of hairlanguage skills
Some dairy farmers want their cows to produce greater amounts of milk than average cows. Which process will help the dairy farmers develop cows with this trait?selective breedingbehavioral modificationecological successiongeographical isolation
Which tool will best help scientists understand relationships between oceans and climate changes?a computer modela weather balloona rain gaugeradar
A student mixes a spoonful of sand into a beaker of water. Which two methods can be used to separate the sand from the water?filtration and evaporationsettling and chromatographychromatography and filtrationsettling and magnetic attraction
A warm-blooded organism that nurses its young would be calleda bird.an insect.a mammal.a reptile.
Elements on the Periodic Table of the Elements are classified into categories such asrocks and mineralsmolecules and atomsmixtures and compoundsmetals and nonmetals
In a genetics investigation, students used two red straws to represent male parent DNA. They used two green straws to represent female parent DNA. The offspring in this activity are best represented byeither one red straw or one green straw.two green straws.two red straws.one red straw and one green straw.
The process of cellular respiration occurs inboth plant and animal cells.plant cells only.animal cells only.neither plant nor animal cells.
Ana rolled her wagon down the ramp to reach the playground. There, she and her sister played on the seesaw. Which set of simple machines has Ana used?Lever, pulley, and wedgePulley, inclined plane, and screwWedge, wheel and axle, and screwWheel and axle, inclined plane, and lever
Which of these features, formed east of the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range, is due to moist air rising along the western slope of the mountain range?desertgrasslandrain foresttemperate forest
Human activity most likely contributes to which of the following changes on Earth?an increase in the length of a daya decrease in the number of volcanic eruptionsa decrease in the magnitude of large earthquakesan increase in the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide
A student is reading the nutritional information on a box of cereal. It says that a single serving contains 215 calories. Which type of energy is being measured by this unit?kineticchemicalelectricalmechanical
Crustal plates that pull apart from one another most likely formvolcanic island arcs.strike-slip faults.oceanic trenches.rift zones.
A change in the position of an object as time changes best describesdirection.waves.motion.frequency.
What two organ systems are involved in the transfer of oxygen to the cells from outside the body?skeletal and digestiveskeletal and respiratorycirculatory and digestivecirculatory and respiratory
Sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) are two reactive and dangerous elements. Chlorine is a halogen gas that can cause respiratory damage and sodium is an alkali metal that reacts violently with water. What happens to the properties of sodium and chlorine when they react to form sodium chloride (NaCl), common table salt?The properties of both sodium and chlorine change.The properties of both sodium and chlorine remain the same.The properties of sodium are different but chlorine remains a dangerous gas.The properties of sodium remain the same but the properties of chlorine change.
Which list includes only examples of matter that can take the shape of a container?oil, air, and rockwater, air, and milksand, ice, and woodnail, stick, and paper
Which source of energy is nonrenewable?coalsunlightwaterwood
Which of the following is most necessary for life to develop on another planet?liquid waterrocky surfaceswarm soilatmospheric oxygen
Plants that are different from each another may have similar structures. Which structure do all plants have in common?flowersfruitrootstrunks
Which organism is a producer?frogmushroomgrasslizard
Some machines have been designed to perform complicated tasks which result from a demand forminimizing illness from disease.minimizing the need for manual labor.maximizing the price of consumer goods.maximizing the use of non-renewable resources.
Scientists are developing new satellite technology to help predict the weather. How will developing this technology most likely benefit people?It will show people that storms can be prevented.It will show people that science is interesting.It will help warn people about dangerous storms.It will help people drive in the rain.
Which statement about gravity is written as a law?The reason gravity works is because masses bend time and space.The effect of gravity on plants might be reduced if certain minerals are added to the soil.The force of gravity between two objects depends upon their masses and the distance between them.The experiments being done on gravity today are better than what were done in the past and a full understanding is only a few years away.
What does the brain monitor to control the rate of breathing during normal activities?the level of carbon dioxide in the bloodthe level of carbon dioxide in the cellsthe level of carbon dioxide in the lungsthe level of carbon dioxide in the air
A researcher is measuring changes in the density of the upper atmosphere over time. Which units should be used for the density measurements?kg/sm^3/sL/m^3kg/m^3
Which function requires the muscular, skeletal, and nervous systems to work together?movement of appendagescompletion of blood circulationabsorption of nutrientsregulation of hormones
Michael Faraday showed how electric current in a wire producesmoleculeschemicalsa vibrationa magnetic field
Mrs. Moyers teaches her students about different energy sources. Which example comes from a renewable source of energy?water heated by solar panelsfood cooked over natural gaselectricity produced from coalan engine powered by gasoline
What is at the center of our solar system?a medium planet with an atmosphere.a star composed of carbon and nitrogen.a black hole that was once a star.a star composed of hydrogen and helium.
Which device directly converts chemical energy into electrical energy?solar-powered calculatorwood-burning stovebattery-powered flashlightwind-powered sailboat
Some students have gathered a collection of rock samples from the school yard to study. They scraped the rocks against a piece of quartz from the school lab. Which property of minerals are the students investigating?texturehardnesscolorstreak
Which organisms eat only plants?producersomnivoresherbivoresscavengers
Which of the following is a characteristic of the "steady state theory" of the universe?The universe is constantly growing and changing.A great explosion caused the origin of the universe.The nature of the universe has always been the same.Light moving from the center of the universe appears red.
A sunspot appears as a dark spot on the sun that is cooler than the surrounding area. On which region of the sun do sunspots occur?chromospherecorecoronaphotosphere
The Great Miami Aquifer is a large underground water supply that lies under much of southwest Ohio. The water level of the aquifer could be reduced over time by too muchrainfall.pollution.irrigation.evaporation.
What kind of energy conversion occurs after a candle is lit?friction to electrical energylight energy to heat energymass to kinetic energychemical energy to light energy
What is one way the body reacts to cold weather?sneezingswallowingshiveringsweating
Running to escape danger is an action that requires the nervous system to coordinate the interaction of which two body systems?digestive and endocrinemuscular and skeletalreproductive and excretorycirculatory and digestive
What causes day and night on Earth?Earth's rotation on its axisthe Sun's revolution around EarthEarth's revolution around the Sunthe Sun's rotation on its axis
Which is the best explanation of why the Moon revolves around Earth?The Moon has a thinner atmosphere than Earth.The Moon is too large to move away from Earth.The Moon is attracted by the gravity of Earth.The Moon has a smaller gravitational force than Earth.
Which observation provides evidence of the existence of planets orbiting other stars?periodic dimming of the starsperiodic X-ray bursts from the starsrapid location changes of the starsregular spectrum changes from the stars
Mutations that occur in sex cells can be passed from parent to offspring duringcloning.budding.binary fission.sexual reproduction.
Which type of ecosystem has the greatest variation in temperature from its top to its bottom?lakepondoceanestuary
What two factors determine the location of an electron around the nucleus of the atom?speed and direction of the electronsize of the electron and the neutrondirection and strength of the electronenergy and the attraction of the nucleus
The removal of waste from Florida's East Bay and Pensacola Bay is intended to speed the bay ecosystem's natural tendency to do which of the following?adapt to a changed landscapeundergo ecosystem progressionreturn to its pre-pollution conditionsproduce organisms that can survive changed conditions
Matter is defined as anything that takes up space and hasmasstextureodorcolor
Which is the order of the planets from closest to the Sun to farthest from the Sun?Mercury, Venus, Earth, MarsMars, Mercury, Earth, VenusEarth, Venus, Mercury, MarsVenus, Earth, Mars, Mercury
In living things, large and complex molecules are broken down into small and simple molecules. What is this process called?excretionabsorptiondigestioncirculation
Meadow voles are small mouse-like animals that eat plants and insects. Their niche in an ecosystem is aomnivore.herbivore.producer.scavenger.
A dietary supplement manufacturer developed a new calcium supplement that appears to increase the bone density in middle-aged women. When tested in a small clinical trial, the supplement was shown to cause a 15% increase in bone density in 8 out of 10 women. Before the supplement is offered to the general public, which step should the manufacturer take next?add a variety of vitamins to the supplementtest the supplement on mice in the laboratorydevelop packaging that is attractive to womentest the supplement on a larger sample of women
The European starling entered North America in the late 1800s. It proved very successful and was able to spread throughout the United States by 1955. The survival and rapid reproduction of starlings most likely limited the population size of which organisms within its habitats?its decomposersits competitorsits mutualistsits predators
Which does 12.0 grams represent?massvolumespeedforce
Which of the following statements best describes the process of natural selection in a population?All individuals develop traits to match changes to their environment.All individuals learn to adapt to specific changes that occur slowly in their environment.Some individuals respond to their environment by mutating to make themselves more likely to survive.Some individuals have genetic differences that make them more likely to survive and reproduce in their environment.
A researcher is working on a family genetics project. She wants to trace a particular trait back through several generations of her ancestors. Which type of display will best help the researcher organize the information?flow chartcycle diagrampedigree chartPunnett square
Joyce put 200 milliliters of water in a beaker, put a thermometer in it, and heated it until it started to boil. She recorded a temperature of 100°C when it started to boil. She repeated the process with 400 milliliters of water. What would be the temperature when this second sample started to boil?twice as high as the first sample'sslightly higher than the first sample'shalf as high as the first sample'sthe same as the first sample's
Between 40 and 50 million years ago, the landmass on the Indian plate collided with the landmass on the Eurasian plate. What formed when these landmasses collided?the Grand Canyonthe Great Plainsthe Himalayan Mountainsthe Mariana Trench
Hawaii is composed mainly of volcanoes with gentle slopes and large surface areas. Which characteristics best describe the lava these volcanoes have released?relatively fluid and low viscosityhighly viscous and relatively coolmix of hot gas and rock shardsmainly water vapor and large boulders
Mrs. Henderson's class has five small covered boxes. One contains perfume; another contains dried onions. There is also a box of pine needles, a box of lemon pieces, and a box with a paper towel wetted with vanilla flavoring. Which should they do to get the best information about what is in each box?Shake the boxes.Smell the boxes.Listen to the boxes.Weigh the boxes.
Which of these best describes the relationship between Earth's layers?The hottest layers are closest to the core.The more liquid layers are closest to the crust.The lightest layers are closest to the core.The more metallic layers are closest to the crust.
A neutral atom is best described as havingmore protons than neutrons.more electrons than protons.an equal number of protons and neutrons.an equal number of protons and electrons.
Which statement best describes a learned characteristic in a dog?A dog scratches at a door to go outside.A dog has floppy ears.A dog pants to cool itself on a hot day.A dog has a dark coat.
In the Northern Hemisphere, June 21st has more hours of sunlight than any other day. However, June 21st has the fewest hours of sunlight in the Southern Hemisphere. Which best explains why the Northern Hemisphere receives more daylight than the Southern Hemisphere on the same day?Earth rotates on its axisEarth is tilted on its axisThe Sun moves closer to the Northern HemisphereThe Sun releases more energy to the Northern Hemisphere
Which of these shows the correct order needed for a solar eclipse to happen?Sun, Earth, MoonSun, Moon, EarthMoon, Sun, EarthMoon, Earth, Sun
A greenhouse is an example of a closed system. Which two types of energy are exchanged in this system?radiant energy for nuclear energyradiant energy for thermal energythermal energy for nuclear energynuclear energy for chemical energy
Which of the following has changed over the last 200 years primarily due to human activity?Earth's magnetic fieldthe frequency of earthquakesEarth's tectonic plate activitythe composition of the atmosphere
What physical property is characteristic of all of the elements in the group located in the rightmost column of the periodic table?very high melting pointgas state at room temperaturegood conductor of electric currentextremely brittle solid at room temperature
Which difference between land and water contributes most directly to global climate change resulting from tectonic movement?mean material densitiesmagnetic material contentheat absorption and retention propertiesrate of radioactivity-related heat release
How does the Sun most affect the water cycle?The Sun causes the ocean water to evaporate.The Sun creates water droplets in the clouds.The Sun forces water to drain back into the ocean.The Sun makes the clouds produce precipitation.
Many sports stadiums use grass, but some use fake grass called artificial turf. Artificial turf is made of fibers that look like real grass. In which way is this technology most likely beneficial?It uses less water.It produces more heat.It releases less moisture.It absorbs more carbon dioxide.
The western coast of the United States has been increasing in size for millions of years. Which process has added material to the western coast of the United States?deposition at transform boundariesaccretion at convergent boundarieslandslides at divergent boundariesmeteorite impact at convergent boundaries
Which of the following structures enables fish to remain at a certain depth without expending energy through swimming?swim bladderlateral linedorsal fingill slits
Before strip mining for coal, the topsoil in the area is removed and stored. After mining operations are completed, the land is leveled and topsoil is replaced. The purpose of replacing topsoil isto prevent wind from weathering and eroding surface coal.to prevent radioactive elements from polluting water sources.to provide an environment for new coal formation.to restore the area to a natural condition.
Which event is the best example of competition between species in a pond environment?dragonflies landing on lily padsfrogs and toads eating flieslizards and snakes lying in the sunhawks eating mice
What is the most likely effect of a drought on a population of frogs that live in a shallow swamp?only younger frogs will survivethe number of predators will increasedecrease in frog population as water evaporatesincrease in frog population as more land is exposed
The following waste materials are buried in a landfill. Which will break down most quickly?steelplasticglasspaper
What is the source of genetic information of offspring produced by sexual reproduction?the father onlythe mother onlythe mother and the fatherneither the mother nor the father
Why do multicellular organisms need transport systems?Most have cells that are not able to exchange gases with the outside environment.Most have cells that are unable to grow and survive in their environment.Most have cells that need food from sources outside their environment.Most have cells that require more energy to survive than single-celled organisms.
Scientists frequently monitor levels of microorganisms at beaches in the summer time. High temperatures, pollution, runoff, and illegal dumping all affect water quality. What do these scientific efforts illustrate?Pollution can be eliminated through water testing.High temperatures increase runoff from agricultural fields.Water testing identifies origination of illegal dumping.Monitoring water quality is important to public health.
Machines are often full of moving parts that rub against each other. In machines, a lubricant such as oil is often applied to these moving parts. Why is this oil necessary?to enhance the effectiveness of frictionto increase the efficiency of the machineto provide an additional source of energyto produce more thermal energy on the machine
The manufacturing process used to permanently put parts together is calledcutting.shaping.finishing.assembling.
Solids, liquids, and gases are all different states of which of the following?massmatterweightvolume
Animals respond to environmental stimuli obtained through their sensory organs. How does the body convert information from the environment to an internal response?increased cellular temperatureselective membrane transportchemical signalingosmotic pressure
Which is a primary energy source used by power plants to generate electricity?coalwoodgasolinebatteries
Perry studies the ways in which animals are adapted for survival. Which is a behavioral adaptation that helps the organism to survive?the long neck on a giraffethe webbed feet on a ducka bear hibernating in wintera flower attracting a honeybee
A helium-filled balloon is released into the atmosphere. As the balloon rises, which would most likely increase and cause the balloon to burst?the mass of the heliumthe density of the heliumthe volume of the heliumthe temperature of the helium
Which of the following is composed of many cells?virusbacteriumparameciumplant
As a result of human activity, many lakes in Florida have increased levels of nutrients that support algal growth. These algae grow very rapidly, then die and decompose. What impact does this overgrowth of algae most likely have on the lake ecosystem?The number of fish species increases.The volume of lake water increases.The buildup of bottom sediments decreases.The amount of dissolved oxygen decreases.
The color of which animal allows it to blend into its environment?penguinsquirrelcardinalpolar bear
In the Adirondack forests of New York, some trees have died. The change in the forest is thought to be related to air pollution and rain. Which abiotic factor most likely has been changed as a result of the pollution and rain which resulted in the death of the trees?a decrease in the amount of available oxygenan increase in the amount of sunlighta decrease in the pH of the soilan increase in the nutrients
The Sun is classified asan organisma decomposera stara planet
Which material is attracted to a magnet?ironwoodplasticice
What are the building blocks of all matter?atomsforcescellsvacuoles
Mrs. Henry's class studied the arrangement of planets in the solar system. Which planets are closest to each other?Mars and EarthSaturn and JupiterMercury and VenusUranus and Neptune
The primary role of the endocrine system is toproduce hormones that regulate body functionsform chemicals that destroy microbesbreak down food to release nutrientssupply red blood cells to carry oxygen
What happens when an animal hibernates?There is no life in any of its parts.It stops breathing.Its temperature is higher than when it is active.It is absorbing energy for use when it is active.It is using less energy than when it is active.
The invention of the microscope was important to the advancement of science. Many other discoveries were only possible with the help of the microscope. The microscope was used to make which discovery?Matter is made of elements.Plants can make their own food.Some organisms have only one cell.White light can be broken into colors.
A galaxy is best described as a cluster ofhundreds of stars.thousands of stars.millions of stars.billions of stars.
A student in science class finds an unlabeled bottle containing a liquid. For safety purposes the student shouldtell the teacher about the bottle and liquid.pour the liquid down the drain.compare the liquid to other liquids.find the mass of the bottle and liquid.
A scientist discovered a way to turn plant material into fuel. This more cleanly burning fuel can be used in cars. How do people most likely benefit from turning plant material into fuel?Cars are safer to drive.Farmers grow more plants.The amount of air pollution is reduced.The number of cars around the world increases.
Sunlight is able to penetrate the top several meters of marine water, where most plant and animal life exists. Which of these systems are interacting in this description?solar energy and ocean systemssolar energy and weather systemsweather systems and ocean systemssolar energy, ocean systems, and weather systems
A male puppy inherits traits fromboth parentsits mother, onlyits father, only
Fossil fuels were made from specific kinds of ancient organisms. The fossilized remains of tiny ocean organisms formedonly coal.only natural gas.oil and coal.oil and natural gas.
In the water cycle, where does water go after reaching the ocean?The water flows into a river.The water falls from the clouds.The water sinks to the ocean floor.The water changes into water vapor.
Mountain bike tires have large, knob-like treads. These tires are useful on steep slopes because theyincrease friction.carry heavy weights.increase the stopping distance.prevent braking of the bicycle.
A student plans to write a report about a type of bird that includes only facts. Which statement should the student leave out of the report?These birds are blue.These birds are beautiful.Most of these birds are 13 cm tall.Most of these birds are about 10 grams.
Over a long time, oil can form when layers of sediment push down on decomposingtrees.animals.fungi.algae.
A biological community is made up of all thepopulations living in an areanatural resources present in an areamembers of a species on Earthenvironments on Earth
Which temperature and moisture conditions describe an air mass that originates over the Atlantic Ocean near the equator?warm and drywarm and humidcool and drycool and humid
The parts of plants that make seeds are theroots.stems.flowers.leaves.
Fossil fuels were formed fromuraniumsea watersand and graveldead plants and animals
Over time, iron becomes rust when it combines with water and oxygen. Which type of change must occur for rust to form?chemicalmechanicalnuclearphysical
When a bottle of strong perfume is opened at the front of a classroom, the smell gradually spreads throughout the entire room. Which process explains this occurrence?osmosisdiffusioncell activitycell transport
A student is trying to model an ocean environment. What is the most important factor the student should add to the aquarium in order to make sure that the model is accurate?starfishseaweedsalt watercoral reef
Students measured how long it took for an ice cube to melt. Which measurement best represents how long it took for the ice cube to melt?20° Celsius40 grams60 milliliters80 seconds
Rocks are classified as sedimentary, metamorphic, or igneous on the basis of theage of the rocksway the rocks were formedtypes of fossils the rocks containnumber of minerals found in the rocks
Which basic units of matter have the same properties as an element?protonselectronsatomsneutrons
Some jet airplanes fly in a layer of the atmosphere where temperature generally increases with altitude. What is this layer of the atmosphere?mesospherestratospherethermospheretroposphere
One unique characteristic of water is that its specific heatcan only be measured in calories.is lower than other common substances.is higher than other common substances.requires little energy for a big temperature change.
An earthquake occurs in western Nevada. What most likely causes the earthquake?stress due to the movement of Earth's crustal platesgravitational variation due to the Moon's orbit around Earthtemperature variation due to Earth's orbit around the Sunrotational imbalance due to changes in the location of Earth's poles
A scientist puts more food than a lab rat can eat in each of 100 cages containing lab rats. She surveys the mass of food each rat eats in one day. To determine the difference between the largest and smallest masses of food eaten, she should find her data'smean.range.mode.median.
Which of these is defined as "the passage of genetic instructions from one generation to the next?"growthhereditydevelopmentreproduction
What is the primary source of stored thermal energy in oceans?sunlightplanktonvolcanoeshurricanes
Two empty metal cans, one black and one white, were placed outside on a hot day. Both cans were the same size and were left in the Sun for 3 hours. Compared to the white can, the black can would most likely becooler, because it absorbs less sunlightcooler, because it absorbs more sunlightwarmer, because it absorbs less sunlightwarmer, because it absorbs more sunlight
Oil and gas are two sources of energy used in America. Which is the main reason oil and gas may be replaced with other sources of energy in the future?Oil and gas produce very little power.Oil and gas work in too few machines.Oil and gas are limited in their supplies.Oil and gas are too costly to remove from the ground.
Which of these are parts of the geologic process that changes metamorphic rock into sedimentary rock?volcanic eruption and lava flowigneous intrusion and solidificationfaulting and displacementerosion and deposition
In a forest, a brown-colored bird sits on a tree branch. How does the bird's brown color most likely help it survive in the forest?attracts insects for foodwarns predators of its defensehides it from predatorsallows it to stay warm
Rock layers with sand-sized particles were most likely deposited bywind.water.glaciers.landslides.
The living systems of plants and animals are constantly taking in water to continue the processes of life. What eventually happens to most of that water?It is converted into hydrogen and oxygen.It is returned to the environment.It is broken down by bacterial decay.It is permanently combined with other compounds.
MOST of the volcanoes that make up the "Ring of Fire" were formed nearhot spots.subduction zones.divergent boundaries.normal faults.
Which is not considered an instrument to be used to determine weather?a barometera thermometeran anemometera millimeter
Which natural process is responsible for the formation of the Mississippi Delta?snowdroughtdepositionweathering
Neon (Ne), argon (Ar), and krypton (Kr) are in the same column on the Periodic Table of the Elements. What characteristic do these elements have in common?atomic massnegative electrical chargenumber of neutronsfull valence electron shells
Screech owls nest in holes in trees. They eat mice and crickets. Where would a screech owl most likely live?a beacha foresta deserta rainforest
Carlos was playing on a slide on a sunny summer day. Which property of the slide tells Carlos how much energy the slide absorbed from the Sun?the massthe colorthe heightthe temperature
Which equation summarizes the process of respiration?water + carbon dioxide + energy -> sugar + oxygenoxygen + sugar -> carbon dioxide + water + energycarbon dioxide + oxygen + water -> sugar + energysugar + carbon dioxide + energy -> oxygen + water
When a baker bakes bread, he prepares the dough by mixing 2 cups of flour with 1 cup of water. The water needs to be 85°F. Which tools are best for the baker to measure both the volume and temperature of the water?a balance and a rulera balance and a thermometera measuring cup and a balancea measuring cup and a thermometer
What form of energy makes a compass needle point north?electricalheatlightmagnetic
Which process in the water cycle is directly caused by the heat from the Sun?evaporationrunoffcloud formationstream flow
Which tool is used to observe the cell wall of a leaf?rulercamerahand lensmicroscope
Which material best conducts electricity?wool coatcopper pipeplastic strawwooden stick
In 1922 N. L. Bowen developed the concept of magmatic evolution which is also known as Bowen's Reaction Series. Applying the Bowen's Series principles, what mineral forms and crystallizes first in the region of highest temperature and pressure?olivinepyroxeneamphibolequartz
A cyclist travels 3 km north in 25 minutes. What does this information describe?massforcemotiongravity
Which of these occurs when the North Pole is tilted toward the Sun and the United States has the most daylight hours of the year?summer solsticewinter solsticespring equinoxfall equinox
A ball rolls across the floor and slows down to a stop. Which force caused the ball to slow down?frictiongravitymagneticinertia
Which energy source might involve burning wood or producing gasohol?biomasswind turbinenuclear fissionhydroelectric power
A marine iguana is an animal that lives on the shoreline of warm islands. Its tail is long and thick. Which of these is improved by the shape of its tail?swimming in the oceanblending in with rocksabsorbing nutrientsfinding food inland
Leslie's science teacher told her she must take a flexible approach to solving problems. What did Leslie's teacher most likely mean?Leslie should not follow the experimental instructions exactly.Leslie should only write down lab results that seem to be correct.Leslie should accept all scientific theories even if they have been proven wrong.Leslie should be willing to consider many possible causes for her observations.
What would happen if a magnet was placed in the center of a plastic bowl containing a mixture of iron filings and sand?The sand will be repelled by the magnet.The iron filings will be attracted to the magnet.The sand will be attracted to the magnet.The iron filings will be repelled by the magnet.
Which property of an object is identified using the sense of smell?colorodortemperatureweight
Hector's class is counting the number of ducks in a pond. Hector counts a different number than the rest of the class. Which of the following actions should Hector most likely perform?keep the resultchange the number he countedthink that the class results are wrongremove his number from the class result
Which property of sugar remains after sugar is dissolved in water?colortasteshapetexture
Which substance is composed of only one type of atom?watergoldsaltsugar
Over a two-week period, several students complain of feeling sick. Their symptoms include a cough, fever, and a sore throat. What describes the most likely cause of these symptoms?exposure to hot weatherdecrease in physical exerciseconsumption of bad foodinfection by a virus
The Appalachian Mountains, which extend from Canada to Alabama, were much taller in the past than they are today. Which of the following two processes are most responsible for the decrease in the height of the Appalachian Mountains?weathering and erosionsedimentation and floodingvolcanic eruptions and landslidestectonic collisions and earthquakes
Which organisms break down and recycle dead plants and animals?predatorspreydecomposersproducers
Which is not a significant reason why people are living longer today than 100 years ago?development of sugar substitutesdevelopment of medicinesbetter health carebetter nutrition
Joann repeatedly overfed the fish in the pond behind her house. The nitrates from the excess food contributed to an overgrowth of algae. To correct the problem, Joann added more plants to the pond. How will adding more plants help?The plants make the pond look beautiful.The plants will camouflage the green algae.The plants will compete with algae for nutrients.The plants will provide all the food for the fish.
The engineering team that is designing a scientific research station on the Arctic permafrost has to provide the station with energy for cooking, heating, and lighting. Considering the fragile environment and other conditions there, the best choice is probably tobuild a wind turbine.have fuel trucked in.have a pipeline built.build a solar collector.
A student walks to school each morning in Maine. It is dark outside when he begins walking. As the days pass, the student notices the mornings are becoming brighter. The Sun is rising earlier each day. He also notices that there is more daylight after school. The Sun is setting later in the day. Which change of seasons is occurring?winter to springsummer to fallspring to winterfall to winter
Where did organisms live when they first appeared on Earth?in the waterin the airon the landunder the ground
Which of the following will always produce a magnetic force on a nearby iron nail?a long piece of copper wirea large static electric chargean electric currentan electric field
Which of these items is designed to produce heat from electricity?a toastera cameraa blendera television
A student records the temperature in the schoolyard every day for a month. Which is the best way to present the temperature data so each day can be compared?summary paragraphlabeled diagrampie chartbar graph
At approximately which time of day is the Sun at the highest point in the sky to an observer in New York State?6 a.m.noon6 p.m.midnight
When one form of energy is converted into other forms of energy, the total amount of energyvaries throughout the conversion.increases because some energy is created.remains constant throughout the conversion.decreases because some energy is destroyed.
To study the effect of heat on plant growth, Andy divided ten identical seedlings into groups. She placed one group on a windowsill in the sun and the other group in a dark closet on the cool (north) side of the house. Think about the characteristics of a properly designed scientific experiment. What is wrong with the above experiment?The temperature difference between the two groups was not great enough.The amount of light was different for the two groups.One group of seedlings got less water than the other.Nothing is wrong with the experiment.
Which of these groups would be most concerned with technological developments in insect control?paleontologistsarchaeologistsagriculturistsmeteorologists
A model of Earth would be different from a model of the Moon because the Moon model would beshinierheaviersmallerrougher
A student sees a bird at a feeder. The student identifies the bird as a sparrow. Which organ system did the student use to identify the bird?circulatorymuscularnervousskeletal
Which tool is the best to use when studying small organisms not visible to the eye?telescopehand lensmicroscopemagnifying glass
Which would most likely cause a decrease in the number of woodpeckers in an ecosystem?draining a spring-fed pondplowing and planting meadowsdestroying all dead trees and stumpsbuilding a road around a small forest
Which is not a characteristic common to organisms?requires energyreproductionrigiditypresence of DNA
Which calculation is used to determine acceleration?divide change in velocity by change in timemultiply average velocity by change in timedivide average velocity by massmultiply change in velocity by distance traveled
Dogs have some learned behaviors. Which is most likely a learned behavior in a dog?sniffing to find foodpanting when it feels hotchasing a squirrel up a treebarking when it wants to go outside
Some wasp species lay their eggs inside living caterpillars. As the eggs mature, they use the caterpillar as a food resource. Eventually, the wasp larvae hatch out of the caterpillar. This type of relationship is best described aspredator-prey.parasitic.mutualistic.commensalistic.
Which is the best action to help protect water resources in Virginia?Dispose of pet waste in a stream.Rinse spilled gasoline with a hose.Organize a river cleanup program.Put hazardous waste in with house trash.
The Moon's rotation isfaster than its revolution.slower than its revolution.half as fast as its revolution.about the same as its revolution.
Which process involves choosing certain organisms to reproduce with one another in order to pass on specific, desirable traits to their offspring?selective breedingasexual reproductionresource acquisitionnatural selection
During which process are nuclei duplicated?mitosisrespirationphotosynthesisfertilization
In a turtle race, each turtle walks one a 3-meter track. If the turtles walk one at a time, how can you tell which turtle was fastest?The turtle that started first is fastest.The turtle that finished first is fastest.The turtle that took the shortest time is fastest.The turtle that took the longest time is fastest.
Which organism is a decomposer?frogwormoak treegrasshopper
Parents with freckles often have children with freckles. This occurs becausefreckles develop from light.certain foods cause freckles.certain habits cause freckles.freckles are an inherited trait.
Two fossils of the same species were found on two different continents. The continents are separated by the Atlantic Ocean. Scientists dated the fossils to be 2 million years old. Which is the least likely explanation for these findings?A great land bridge once connected the continents.The remains were carried by ocean currents.A single landmass once existed with both continents.The animals swam across the ocean.
Students visited a garden to observe hummingbirds. They wanted to find out if hummingbirds were more likely to visit colored flowers or white flowers. Which should the students do first for this investigation?conclude that hummingbirds prefer white flowerswrite a report about the kinds of flowers in the gardenobserve hummingbirds at flowers and record the flower colorresearch the number of different hummingbirds that live in the garden
What is the name of the author who proposed natural selection as the mechanism of evolution?MendelDarwinLamarckHardy-Weinberg
Which pair of terms describes the usual location for fertilization and the first stages of development in human reproduction?external fertilization and external developmentexternal fertilization and internal developmentinternal fertilization and external developmentinternal fertilization and internal development
In the rock cycle an igneous rock forms fromcooling temperatureshigh pressure and heatweathering and erosioncompacted plant remains
Mars is an inner planet and Jupiter is an outer planet. Which best describes the relationship between the two planets?They are made of the same materials.They orbit the Sun in opposite directions.They have the same orbital periods around the Sun.They are located on opposite sides of the asteroid belt.
In order for electricity from a battery to power a light bulb, the wire has to provide the electricity a path to do what?flow through the entire closed circuitcharge the air molecules near the circuitjump from one battery terminal to the otherchange the chemical properties of the wire
Many cities encourage people to recycle. The items that can be recycled are placed in a special container and picked up each week from people's homes. How does recycling most likely help the environment?Recycling reduces littering.Recycling makes products last longer.Recycling puts less trash in the city landfill.Recycling increases the amount of dust in the air.
When coal burns, the reactionreleases heat and is endothermic.releases heat and is exothermic.absorbs heat and is endothermic.absorbs heat and is exothermic.
Scientists have discovered that there has been a reduction in the butterfly population in an ecosystem. After much research, they have identified that the carrying capacity for butterflies has been decreased. If the scientists want to increase the butterfly population, which action should they recommend?removing primary producersspraying of insecticidesincreasing runoffplanting flowers
Which do meteorologists use to measure the amount of precipitation that falls during a storm?AnemometerBarometerRain gaugeWeather vane
Which terms are both used to describe the weather?gravity and wind directionprecipitation and runoffgroundwater and erosionair temperature and wind speed
Which of these has been controlled in an attempt to reduce the depletion of ozone in Earth's atmosphere?methods of filtering gasolineuse of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)methods of radioactive waste storageuse of mercury (Hg) compounds
Today's limestone caverns were once solid rock. Acidic rainwater seeping through the rock over hundreds of years dissolved part of the rock, forming caverns. This is an example oferosion.deposition.physical weathering.chemical weathering.
Which of the following contains most of the water on Earth?the oceanswatershedsthe atmosphereice and aquifers
Which substance do all living things require to survive?bloodwatercarbon dioxideorganic soil
A student plans to measure the thermal expansion of a strip of metal as it is heated from 0ºC to 50ºC. Which piece of equipment should he use to measure the expansion?a rulera balancea compassa protractor
Which of these was used by Alfred Wegener as evidence that Earth's continental landmasses had drifted apart over time?the age of the continentsthe shape of the continentsthe thickness of the continentsthe composition of the continents
The driver of a car at a railroad crossing hears a change in pitch of the train whistle as the train passes by. This change in pitch is most likely due tothe Doppler effect.the Compton effect.a change in medium.a change in speed.
Which is an example of a hypothesis?Large mice will eat more food than smaller mice.One flower was measured to be 13 centimeters tall.On a dark night, a student counted hundreds of stars.People should be careful to protect endangered animals.
Which would be considered an inexhaustible resource?oiltopsoilsunlightaluminum
Which factor causes surface ocean currents?the Sunthe windthe Moonhurricanes
Marta has a radio in her room. It requires electricity in order to play. Which of the following is necessary in order for electricity to move from the source to the radio?a circuita magneta light bulban insulator
Having dry, hot weather for a long time can cause adroughtthunderstormtornadoflood
What is the primary function of white blood cells in humans?carry oxygenfight diseasegrow tissuesremove waste
Which trait most likely helps an animal survive in a very cold environment?long earslarge eyesthick fursharp claws
Which is most likely a genetic adaptation of desert plants to survive the hot, dry climate conditions?thin barkwaxy leavesleaves that remain all yearflowers that bloom all year
Charles Darwin made a number of observations and inferences during his travels. He studied island finches during a long period of time. Which statement is an inference?Individual birds have different colored feathers.Island finches have a large number of offspring.Individual birds of an island finch species have many differences.Island finches share a common ancestry with mainland finch species.
A student mixes salt and water in a beaker to form a solution. What properties of the substances would allow the student to then separate the components?densitiesparticle sizesboiling pointselectrical conductivity
In a lab investigation, students had to identify different mineral specimens. Which property is the most reliable for identifying one mineral from another?texturehardnesscrystal shapesurface color
Which of these revolves around a planet?an asteroid.a star.a comet.a moon.
A scientist wants to collect several bird eggs on an island. She needs a case that will protect the eggs she collects. Which of the following cases would best protect the eggs?a hard metal case with flexible foam lininga flexible metal case with smooth plastic lininga strong wooden case with lightweight plastic lininga lightweight wooden case with strong aluminum lining
Which process is a cause of variation in a species?metamorphosiscellular respirationsexual reproductionregulation
The leaves of a tree change color in the fall. This is an example of a treecompleting its life cyclepreparing for migrationresponding to its environmentbeginning hibernation
A dog growls when a predator gets close. Growling is an example of which animal behavior?migrationhibernationcommunicationgermination
In what respect are protons and electrons always equal?mass numberkinetic energysign of chargemagnitude of charge
How does the Sun help move water from the ocean through the water cycle?by causing surface water to evaporateby adding particles to the waterby increasing the amount of waterby blowing water toward land
What would a model of the Sun, Earth, and Moon best help students visualize?the phases of the Moonthe effects of gravitationthe effects of volcanic eruptionsthe consequences of earthquakes
How are bacterial cells and human cells alike?They allow oxygen through the cell wall.They allow carbon dioxide through the cell wall.They allow nutrients through the cell membrane.They allow nutrients through the nuclear membrane.
The Moon's surface is visible to an observer on Earth because the Moonreflects sunlightabsorbs light from Earthproduces its own lighttransmits sunlight
Why do trees like oaks and walnuts depend upon squirrels?to control population sizeto pollinate their flowersto remove dead woodto aid in seed distribution
When an atom gains an electron, the atom willlose a proton.reduce its mass.become radioactive.have a negative charge.
A paramecium is an example ofa single-celled organism.multiple organisms.an inorganic substance.a group of cells.
A sea anemone uses poisonous darts toabsorb food.defend itself.attract a mate.protect its young.
Rivers and streams can carry sediments long distances before they are deposited. What is formed when sediments are deposited at the mouth of a river?a leveea gullya deltaa rift
Steel is used for cables in suspension bridges because of its capacity fortension.torsion.compression.contraction.
In which layer of the atmosphere does most of Earth's weather occur?the exosphere, which is the outermost layerthe troposphere, which is the lowest layerthe thermosphere, which has the highest temperaturethe stratosphere, which contains a sub-layer of ozone
When light is reflected off an object and enters the eye, it falls on thelens.pupil.retina.cornea.
The skin, lungs, and kidneys work together tohelp eliminate body wastes.help blood circulate.aid in digestion.aid in respiration.
Which type of matter can be separated by physical means?atomelementcompoundmixture
Which plant part is described correctly?Stems make seeds.Roots absorb nutrients.Leaves absorb water.Flowers make food.
Which process causes sand grains to stick together to form sandstone?abrasioncementationcombustionerosion
Plants store energy in what form?heatlightchemicalmechanical
A student placed a rock in a graduated cylinder containing water, causing the water level in the cylinder to increase by 20 mL. This increase represents the rock'smassvolumesolubilitytemperature
Researchers are investigating whether dinosaurs were endothermic like birds. Which evidence from the fossil record could be effectively compared with modern day evidence to support this hypothesis?similarities in bone structureseasonal shifts in food supplyconsumption of the same plant speciestree rings indicating the return of a similar climate
A student pushes a box to slide it across the floor. Which statement explains why the box begins to move?The weight of the box is greater than the force of friction.The weight of the box is less than the force of friction.The applied force is greater than the force of friction.The applied force is less than the force of friction.
Which article might appear in a scientific magazine?"The Religions of South America""The Money Systems of South America""The Flora and Fauna of South America""The Political Systems of South America"
A train travels at a rate of 13 meters per second (m/s). Over the next 60 seconds, the speed of the train increases to speed to 22 m/s. What is the average rate of acceleration of the train?0.15 m/s^20.21 m/s^20.36 m/s^20.58 m/s^2
Which trait is common in gases that contribute to Earth's greenhouse effect?the ability to trap heata tendency to lose electronsa tendency to exist as diatomic moleculesthe ability to bond with multiple other elements
George is studying erosion. He learns how rocks break apart over time. Which of these most likely forms when a rock weathers and breaks into small pieces?fossilscrystalsmineralssediments
As wave frequency is increased, wave energystays constant.is unaffected.increases.decreases.
A student is pouring equal amounts of water, maple syrup, and cooking oil into a glass beaker and looking at how the layers settle. Which property of the liquids is the student most likely comparing?densitymasstemperaturevolume
Betsy tries to attract a variety of birds to her backyard. She puts up a bird feeder that contains sunflower seeds and corn. Which term best describes the contents of the bird feeder?a mixturea solutionan elementa compound
Which best describes construction technology?exchanging information electronicallychanging raw materials into goodsbuilding and finishing a structureconverting and transmitting energy
What eventually happens to a species when the environment changes and the organisms do not adapt?classificationdevelopmentextinctionregulation
Similar types of cells form tissues. What is the next level of complexity formed from the grouping of tissues?organsorganellesorganismsorgan systems
Which form of energy is produced when a rubber band vibrates?chemicallightelectricalsound
Which discovery was necessary before radio could be invented?reflectionradiationelectricitygravity
Which statement would most likely be included in a news report about an approaching hurricane?Open the windows to equalize air pressure.Install snow tires and check the antifreeze in the car radiator.Evacuate low-lying areas near the coast.Expect wind speed to decrease for the next several hours.
The energy produced by a burner on a gas stove is primarilyelectrical.heat.mechanical.sound.
Students compare two different rocks. The rocks are both bright and spotted. Which property are the students most likely observing?layerstexturescolorsages
Which of the following makes up the smallest region in the electromagnetic spectrum?radio wavesinfrared lightvisible lightgamma rays
In a northern state, a room used for growing plants is not allowing enough light to enter for healthy plant growth. Adding windows in walls facing which direction would best solve this problem?northsoutheastwest
A student finds a bottle that is labeled with a long chemical name. What is the best way for the student to learn more about the chemical properties of this substance?shake the container vigorouslysmell a very small amount of itlook up the name in a science booktest a small amount to see if it feels slippery
The length of a year on Earth is a little over 365 days. The length of a year on a planet is best described as the time it takes for which to occur?the planet to revolve once around the Sunthe seasons to complete a full cyclethe planet to rotate once on its axisthe Sun to rotate once on its axis
The human body has different levels of organization. In the structural organization of the central nervous system, which is an organ?braingrey matternerveneuron
Increased human populations can lead to the depletion of locally available resources within communities. Compared to other communities, which of these locally available resources is most likely to be depleted in desert communities?mineraloxygengasolinewater
A hot pack is a product that releases heat when chemicals inside of it interact. What is taking place inside an active hot pack?electric currenta net loss of massthermal insulationan exothermic reaction
Respiration is a process during which energy is released from glucose. This energy is used for processes such as growth of the body. Which type of energy does respiration release?chemicalkineticpotentialthermal
An organism that breaks down dead plants and animals, returning matter back into the soil, is called aherbivore.producer.competitor.decomposer.
What type of cell passes on mutations?skin cellnerve cellred blood cellegg cell
Which population would be harmed first by a long period of drought?seaweed in an oceanfish in a lakeplants in a pondfish in a bay
The house cat was believed to be tamed in ancient Egypt. In 2004, the remains of an eight-month old cat buried with its owner were discovered on the Mediterranean island of Cyprus. The date of burial, however, came before Egyptian civilization. Which best explains the importance of the discovery?Wildcats are not related to house cats.Cats were domesticated earlier than originally thought.Wildcats were not domesticated.The period of Egyptian civilization was older than originally thought.
Which activity requires the use of safety goggles to protect the eyes?collecting rain watermeasuring air temperatureclassifying flowerspouring vinegar
The most common source of nonrenewable resources used to generate electricity in the state of Nevada isoil.coal.geothermal.hydroelectric.
A "light year" refers tothe distance light travels in one year.the of time it takes light to travel from Earth to the Sun.the amount of light required on Earth in one year.the distance between two sources of light.
All animals need air to survive. An insect gets air through tiny holes on the sides of its body. A whale breathes through a blow hole. What body part do fish use to breathe?gillsskinnosemouth
Which of the following tools would be most useful in determining the length and width of a school cafeteria?scalecentimeter rulertape measurethermometer
The extensive branching of neurons helps them to perform which function?maintain structural stabilitystockpile chemical energycommunicate with other neuronssecrete hormones
Which of the following are narrow belts of strong winds found in the upper troposphere?doldrumswesterliestrade windsjet streams
A hiker wants to know if air is warmer in a forest than in the nearby farm field. Which activity would best help the hiker find out which area is warmer?reading a book about farm fieldsmaking a weather prediction for the forestsmeasuring the wind speed at both locationsrecording the temperatures at both locations
Recently the telephone company announced the implementation of a new telephone area code for Massachusetts. What technological changes are responsible for the need for a new area code?the increased size of the telephone bookthe increase in use of modems, fax machines, and cellular phonesthe increase in use of speed dialing and call waitingthe increased demand for telephone repairs and installation
Which of the following is a benefit of using radiation as a medical treatment?It kills cancer cells.It produces healthy cells.It improves immune system function.It prevents many forms of illness in patients.
Which of these statements best describes temperature as elevation in the atmosphere increases?Temperature remains constant with elevation in the thermosphere.Temperature remains constant with elevation in the mesosphere.Temperature generally decreases with elevation in the stratosphere.Temperature generally decreases with elevation in the troposphere.
The transfer of heat in the atmosphere by winds that circulate between the equator and the poles is an example ofradiation.insulation.convection.conduction.
Which is most responsible for the uneven heating of the air in the atmosphere?radiationconvectionconductioncondensation
Three gases found in Earth's atmosphere are carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and oxygen. What is their order of abundance from greatest to least?nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxidenitrogen, carbon dioxide, oxygenoxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxidecarbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen
Copper, silver, and nickel are all classified asnoble gases.transition metals.halogens.nonmetals.
The body is made up of many systems that interact with one another. For example, the skeletal system and the muscular system work together to help the body move. Which system works with the respiratory system to distribute oxygen to the body?muscular systemdigestive systemlymphatic systemcirculatory system
Sediment that is deposited on a beach may come from a local source or be transported by which action?swashrip currentsriver currentslongshore drift
Sonar can be used to measure distances underwater. This is accomplished by sending a sound wave to a "target" while measuring the total time it takes for the wave to reach the target and then return to its source. Which of the following sound wave characteristics must be known when using sonar to measure distances?amplitudewavelengthfrequencyspeed
What major events cause islands to form in the Pacific Ocean?tsunamissevere stormsvolcanic eruptionserosion
Fossil fuels are common sources of energy. What type of pollution is most often associated with burning fossil fuels?airlandnoisewater
A boy and his sister both play piano. Playing piano is an example ofa physical changean inherited traita life functiona learned behavior
Which is the best way to generate an electrical current in a coil of wire?stroking the coil with a piece of silkheating the coil uniformlylaying the coil near a magnetrotating the coil in a magnetic field
What property of water best helps aquatic life survive in lakes during the winter?water has a high specific heat capacitywater has a high surface tensionwater is less dense as a solid than as a liquidwater is a polar molecule
Which part of a plant helps the plant make food from sunlight?leafseedfruitpollen
Which of the following is the main reason water at the surface of the ocean is warmer than water at the bottom of the ocean?Water at the bottom of the ocean contains more dissolved solids.Water at the surface of the ocean absorbs more energy from the Sun.Friction is created by fast moving currents at the surface of the ocean.Wave action transfers heat from the bottom of the ocean to the surface.
A student finds an animal in the wild. He decides it is a bird because it hasfins.scales.feathers.four legs.
Many scientists accept the theory that excess emission of carbon dioxide from cars and industry causes a layer of gas in the upper atmosphere that traps heat. This, in turn, causes the average temperature on Earth to rise. Which of the following observations supports that theory?The summer of 1998 was one of the hottest summer seasons on record.Carbon dioxide gas from cars and industry is a product of burning that produces heat.Carbon dioxide in the upper atmosphere reflects heat radiated from Earth's surface.Radiation on Earth's surface is increasing because of a hole in the ozone layer
Why is it important to protect soil?It covers the bedrock layer in the earth.It has nutrients used by plants to grow.It holds many harmful pollutants.It dries quickly in sunlight.
Fungi recycle leaves in forests. Fungi release chemicals onto the leaves to break them down into smaller particles. The fungi use the small particles for growth. Which process allows fungi to obtain the nutrients they need from dead leaves?circulationdigestionreproductionrespiration
Sandstone and all other types of sedimentary rock are made up of particles. The source materials of these particles consist offragments that broke off of older rocks.magma that cooled deep below a volcano.gases that condensed in the atmosphere.vegetation that decayed in thick layers.
A tree uses gas A to produce gas B. An animal uses gas B to produce gas A. What is gas B in this cycle?oxygennitrogencarbon dioxidecarbon monoxide
Which of the following is produced when two or more elements combine in a chemical reaction?atomcompoundmixturesolution
A research team has made new discoveries about magnetism. Which of these statements best describes the value to society of publishing their discoveries?Their results will be unchangeable.The research team may become famous.The publishing company may make money.Their discoveries can be built on by other researchers.
Which object in the sky is a satellite of the planet Earth?SunMoonMarsSaturn
Which statement describes a property of water that most likely causes large rocks to break apart?Water expands when it freezes.Water forms droplets as it falls.Water turns into a gas when it boils.Water takes the shape of its container.
Which of these provides the best evidence that an environmental change has occurred?a freshwater lake in the mountainsmarine fossils in a freshwater lakesaltwater clams in the oceana sandy beach next to the ocean
An ice cube is put into a heated pan. What will most likely happen to the molecules in the ice as the ice is heated?The molecules will begin to move slower.The molecules will begin to move faster.The molecules will begin to increase in density.The molecules will begin to condense in the air.
Dr. Mendez specializes in patients who have osteoarthritis. His patients often complain of pain and swelling due to loss of cartilage. Which system is most affected by this disease?cardiovasculardigestiveimmunemusculoskeletal
During the construction of a new building, workers dug round holes in the ground and filled the holes with steel and concrete. Which of the following parts of the building was being built during this stage of construction?the floorthe foundationthe plumbingthe walls
Centuries ago, people used their knowledge of the stars tonavigate ships.study the weather.predict volcanic eruptions.map the Earth's surface.
Which of these is the BEST way to save animals and trees?Ride bikes moreMake more farmlandTake care of forestsMove to the city
From what source does almost all heat energy on Earth come?WindWaterThe SunThe Moon
Overgrazing of land by livestock contributes to a major problem. That problem isdepletion of ground waterincreased pollutionerosion of soilacid rain
Which tool would be most useful in studying the living organisms the students collected from the pond?balancepH metermicroscopethermometer
Which is the Sun most likely to become toward the end of its lifetime?a protostara black holea neutron stara white dwarf star
Acid rain is the result of pollutants being released into theair.soil.rivers.oceans.
The job of the bladder in an animal is to store wastes. Which organ in an animal removes wastes from the blood?liverheartstomachkidney
Animals get the energy they need for growth and repair byeating foodabsorbing sunlighteliminating wastedrinking water
Which of these cell types has DNA that is not bound in a nuclear membrane?a plant cella protist cellan animal cella prokaryote cell
In humans, digestion begins in the mouth. The complete process of digestion occurs with the help of many different parts of the body. Which term best identifies the parts of the body that carry out the function of digestion?an organan organisma systema tissue
Anita heats a beaker containing water. As the temperature of the water increases, which change to the water molecules occurs?The molecules move at a faster rate.The molecules become more massive.The molecules expand and become wider.The molecules separate into atoms of hydrogen and oxygen.
Which of the following are likely to do the most damage to ecosystems along the Rio Grande River?floodstsunamisblizzardsearthquakes
Which process is responsible for the growth and repair of human tissue?evolutiongerminationcell divisionnatural selection
Which sequence represents the correct levels of organization for multicellular organisms?cell -> tissue -> organ -> organ systemtissue -> organ -> cell -> organ systemorgan system -> organ -> cell -> tissuecell -> organ -> tissue -> organ system
Convection currents in the mantle are thought to be the driving force behind tectonic movement. At which location do the convection currents cause the plates to diverge?strike-slip faultsubduction zonemid-ocean ridgesfolded mountains
A class made a solar cooker out of a large can. What color should they paint the can in order to collect the most heat?blackgreenpinkwhite
Ann makes hats for people. She has each person select the fabric and a hat style before she makes the hat to fit the person's head size. Which type of manufacturing system is Ann most likely using to make hats?mass productioncustom productionautomated productionassembly line production
What information would be most helpful to a person with allergies when selecting food products?the ingredientsthe serving sizethe nutritional informationthe company that makes it
Which event takes about one year to complete?Earth making a complete rotationthe Moon making a complete rotationEarth revolving completely around the Sunthe Moon revolving completely around Earth
Which planet is fourth from the Sun in our solar system?MarsEarthVenusJupiter
What force causes objects to be pulled toward Earth?frictiongravitylightelectricity
What do the long vine of an ivy plant and the trunk of an oak tree have in common?They are both flexible.They are both stiff.They both make food for a plant.They both give support to a plant.
Students wanted to see if the growth of a plant was affected by using four different types of soil. How should the students best carry out this investigation after potting the plants in the four different types of soil?observe the plants and record observations dailymove the plants to new locations every daymeasure the height of each plant every houradd different amounts of water to each plant
In the 16005 Robert Hooke invented an improved type of microscope. Which of these was a direct result of this invention?The first view of atoms and moleculesDetailed observations of Jupiter and MarsThe name spectrum for the colors of lightThe term cell to describe the smallest unit of life
The number of neutrons in an atom is found by subtractingatomic number from mass number.mass number from atomic number.atomic number from electron number.isotope number from electron number.
As the distance between a magnet and a metal paper clip increases, the force of attraction between themdecreasesincreasesremains the same
Nutrients enter the bloodstream during the process oflocomotionrespirationeliminationabsorption
Which set of elements have chemical properties similar to those of phosphorus?nitrogen, arsenic, and antimonycarbon, selenium, and iodinesilicon, sulfur, and germaniumsilicon, sulfur, and chlorine
Tides occur in the oceans at regular times every day because ofupper atmospheric disturbances.the tilt of Earth's rotational axis.density differences caused by temperature changes.the gravitational pull of the Sun and the Moon.
What is the name of the process in the water cycle shown by label 1?infiltrationevaporationcondensationprecipitation
What force pulls things towards the center of Earth?magnetismgravityfrictionenergy
Earth can be viewed as an engine and heat exchange is part of the engine system. Which would be an example of a transfer of energy from the atmosphere to the lithosphere?A volcano erupts in the state of Washington.An earthquake takes place off the coast of Japan.A wild fire scorches a prairie in the upper Midwest.A hurricane moves from the Gulf of Mexico onto land.
All energy resources have benefits, risks, and drawbacks. Which two resources present the most dangerous risks and consequences for the environment during their acquisition?oil and coalcoal and solar energygeothermal energy and oilsolar energy and geothermal energy
A puppy has traits from its mother and its father. Which of these structures provides genetic information from the father to the puppy?a muscle cella nerve cella blood cella sperm cell
A scientist performs an experiment which suggests a new explanation for the digestion of certain proteins in humans. These results should first be communicated to the scientific community by which means?submission of an article to a peer-reviewed journalinclusion of the new explanation in a biology textbookposting observations and conclusions on the scientist's websiteinviting reporters from many organizations to a press conference
Juan noticed that sunny skies suddenly became stormy. Which most likely happened when the weather changed in this way?Winds weakened.Humidity decreased.Air pressure dropped.Temperatures increased.
Which process causes water to move from the ocean to the atmosphere during the formation of a hurricane?condensationevaporationprecipitationrunoff
A student places a chemical in an insulated container and measures the temperature. A second chemical is added and the container is sealed and the temperature is monitored. What is the student trying to determine?What color changes can be observed?How much precipitate is formed?Is heat absorbed or released?How can this reaction be reversed?
Which is an example of asexual reproduction?one cell divides into two cellstwo cells unite to form one cella gene in a cell mutatesegg cells are produced
The sum of all chemical reactions that take place within an organism is known asevolutionmetabolismcirculationreproduction
The appearance of the Moon as observed from Earth changes over time because of the Moon'spath around Earthlength of daylightgravitytemperature
The basic life functions of an organism are carried on bycellsnutrientsatomshormones
What keeps stars such as the Sun from collapsing from their own self-gravity?the centrifugal force created by rapid rotationthe electrical repulsion of nuclei in the plasmathe gravitational pull created by orbiting planetsthe outward pressure created by nuclear fusion
The increasing use of internal combustion engines could eventually deplete which resource?wind energypetroleumuraniumsolar energy
If the results of an experiment do not support the hypothesis, the scientist will most likely do all of the following exceptcheck for errors in the experimental procedure.repeat the experiment.change data to support the hypothesis.ask new questions.
Which has the longest wavelength?red lightgreen lightviolet lightyellow light
Which statement best describes how birth and death rates compare in a population at carrying capacity?The birth rate is greater than the death rate.The birth rate is less than the death rate.The birth rate is equal to the death rate.The birth rate and the death rate are zero.
Your community is planning to build a new sanitary landfill. In locating the landfill, which is the most important environmental consideration?the cost of the landthe location of the groundwaterthe proximity to an industrial parkthe accessibility to a major highway
Which is the best conductor of electricity?airglasswaterwood
Students compared the growth rate of the roots of basil plants in three different water solutions. Measurements were recorded every other day for eight weeks. Which unit of measure is most appropriate for this investigation?meterscentilitersmillimetersliters
When placed in a container at room temperature, which substance has a definite volume but takes the shape of the container?icecopperwaterwood
Elements on the right side of the periodic table differ from the elements on the left side in that the elements on the right sideare solid at room temperature.are good electrical conductors.generally have very high densities.tend to form ions by gaining electrons.
Astronomers have found low-energy background radiation in every part of the sky that they have studied. This radiation is taken as evidence of energy remaining from which event?supernovasthe big bangcollisions of galaxiesmodern decay of unstable atoms
A class is studying how gravity affects objects in motion. Which tool would best measure the distance an object travels after it is thrown?a magnetic compassa meter sticka calculatora stop watch
If the Earth did not tilt on its axis in relation to the sun, which of the following would also be true?There would be no seasons.One Earth-year would be 14% longer.The Earth would spin at a different rate.Temperatures at the Earth's equator would cool.
In the 20th century, Edwin Hubble deduced from observations that there are galaxies other than the Milky Way. Hubble's observations depended on improvements in a technology first developed by which scientist?DemocritusIsaac NewtonGalileo GalileiAnton Van Leeuwenhoek
What is one of the major advantages of using hydroelectric power?It uses renewable natural resources.It is easily generated in most big cities.It can be generated from any area on Earth.It does not require special buildings or equipment.
What is the difference between magma and lava?Magma is below ground. Lava is above ground.Magma is cool. Lava is hot.Magma comes out of earthquakes. Lava comes out of volcanoes.Magma is solid. Lava is liquid.
Scientists today understand how forces work due to Isaac Newton's study ofelectricity.magnetism.atoms.gravity.
On a day in early spring, the number of hours of daylight and of night are about the same. From sunrise to sunset on a spring day, Earth hascompleted half of one rotation.been in the shadow of the Moon.been circled by the Moon one time.moved to the opposite side of the Sun.
A marsh in your neighborhood dried up during a long, hot summer. This is most likely to cause which of the following changes in the neighborhood?an increase in the number of batsa decrease in the number of mosquitoesan increase in the number of insect-eating birdsa decrease in the number of Japanese beetles
In an effort to preserve wildlife on his farm in Massachusetts, a farmer decides to stop using a 10-acre field. The farmer fences off the area, stops cutting the grass, and stops allowing livestock to graze on it. After twenty years, the area would most likelybe covered with moss and rocks.be a mature hardwood forest.be grown over with bushes and small trees.be barren due to lack of maintenance.
Penny's class was learning how rapidly some changes can happen on Earth. Which event causes the fastest change to the surface of Earth?water flowing in a riverbeda wave crashing on a beachan earthquake cracking a roadwind blowing against a mountain
Air that travels away from the equator fails to maintain a straight path. The path of the air is deflected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The apparent deflection of air to either the right or left is known as the Coriolis Effect. Which factor produces the Coriolis Effect?the gravity of Earththe rotation of Earththe axial tilt of Earththe revolution of Earth
When coal is burned to produce electricity, the electrical energy produced is less than the potential energy in the coal. Which best explains this observation?As coal is heated, some of the molecules move so fast that they are destroyed.Some of the energy in coal is destroyed by the intense heat required to release its potential energy.Some of the potential energy in coal is converted into forms of energy other than electricity.The amount of potential energy in fuels is overestimated.
When a person's arm touches something hot, the muscles in the arm react to pull the arm away. Which body system alerts the muscles to react?NervousDigestiveCirculatoryRespiratory
Two chemicals are mixed in a test tube and a chemical reaction takes place. If this reaction is endothermic and the test tube is touched, which of the following best describes what is felt?The test tube is cold.The test tube is warm.The test tube is very hot.The test tube is the same temperature as the air.
The width of a pencil lead is most accurately measured inmeters.inches.millimeters.feet.
Which organism is able to work together with other cells of its species?amoebaeuglenaparameciumvolvox
Which of the following items is necessary in a laboratory for safety purposes?Triple-beam balanceMetric rulerComputer monitorFire extinguisher
Which type of energy is carried through a metal cable?lightchemicalelectricalnuclear
Glaciers cover about 10% of the total land area on Earth. The role of glaciers in the water cycle is tofilter salt waterstore fresh watermove liquid waterprecipitate solid water
The density of a material can be measured by using ameter stick and test tubes.beaker and stopwatch.thermometer and computer probes.balance and graduated cylinder.
Which of the following describes diffraction?the bouncing back of waves as they meet a surfacethe bending of waves as they pass from one medium to anotherthe bending of waves as they pass an edge or an openingthe combining of two waves that meet at a point
What is one way in which workplace automation can have a negative effect on society?reducing the number of job-related injuriesproducing manufactured objects at a faster ratedisplacing skilled workers from manufacturing jobsdecreasing the availability of manufactured products
Which layer of the atmosphere contains about 75% of the gasses and almost all of the water vapor?tropospherestratospheremesospherethermosphere
India was once its own continent. According to the theory of continental drift, India has collided with and become part of the continent of Asia. This causedglaciers in the area to melt.large mountain ranges to form.deep mid-ocean trenches to develop.deserts in the area to become fertile.
Why are many desert animals more active at night?It is drier at night.It is cooler at night.There is less danger at night.There is less wind at night.
If the Earth rotated in the opposite direction, what would most likely occur?The Sun would rise in the west.The seasons would be reversed.There would be more days in each year.The phases of the Moon would last longer.
A student uses a fan and a box of sand to model the formation of sand dunes. This model shows the effect of which natural factor on the landscape?windwatertemperaturegravity
Evan is performing an investigation. Before conducting his investigation, what must Evan do?record his observationsdevelop a hypothesisreach a conclusionorganize the data
When a skydiver jumps from a plane, the open parachute will increase the air resistance byreducing fluid friction.increasing surface area.increasing terminal velocity.decreasing mass.
If you took all of the atoms out of a chair, what would be left?The chair would still be there, but it would weigh less.The chair would be exactly the same as it was before.There would be nothing left of the chair.Only a pool of liquid would be left on the floor.
Which of these is the center of our solar system?MarsThe moonJupiterThe sun
Which of these best describes the Moon?Older than EarthSmaller than EarthHaving the same climate as EarthHaving the same atmosphere as Earth
The color of a star indicates itsspeed.volume.distance.temperature.
Which type of organism helps return nutrients from dead plants and animals to the soil?producerpreypredatordecomposer
When mining for coal, a mining company removes the plants and layers of soil and rock above the coal deposit, and takes the coal. When the operation is complete, the mining company returns soil and rock, covers it with a layer of topsoil, and plants trees and grass. The trees and grass help toprevent a collapse of the underlying sediment.limit the types of pollutants that can enter the soil.increase water absorption by the replaced sediments.reduce soil erosion and provide new habitat for animals.
A model of an atom includes red marbles for electrons, green marbles for protons, and blue marbles for neutrons. All marbles have a radius of 2 cm. How could the model be changed to represent more properties of an atom?by using smaller marbles to represent electronsby using two marbles to represent each neutronby using two differently colored marbles for protonsby switching the colors of the marbles
The smallest particle of matter that can be identified as an element is calledan atom.a proton.an electron.a molecule.
How are the life cycles of a ladybug and a frog similar?The young look like the adults in both cycles.The young hatch from eggs in both cycles.Both life cycles begin in a water habitat.Both life cycles have a pupa stage.
The empty spaces in a material are called pores. Porosity is the amount of empty space within a material. Permeability describes how well the pores in a material are connected. Which of these materials would make the most effective aquifer?a material that has high porosity and high permeabilitya material that has high porosity and low permeabilitya material that has low porosity and high permeabilitya material that has low porosity and low permeability
Why do we see different stars in the sky at different times of the year?The stars are revolving around the Sun.The Moon is revolving around Earth.Earth is revolving around the Sun.The stars are revolving around Earth.
Which of these will most likely occur if chemicals from fertilizers run off into lakes and streams?Water quality will improve.Aquatic animals will thrive.Fish will die from a lack of oxygen.Aquatic plants will stop growing.
A student identifies a soil sample as "very gritty." What characteristic of the soil did the student describe?texturehardnessorganic contentwater retention
When a tree is dormant, the tree isdyinginactivegrowing tallergrowing its leaves
The charge of the nucleus of an atom is due to the presence ofpositive protons.negative neutrons.negative protons and positive electrons.positive protons and negative neutrons.
Earth's hydrosphere is a layer ofrockairlavawater
Riding a bicycle produces several forms of energy. Which form of energy is produced in the greatest amount by pedaling a bicycle down the sidewalk?chemicalradiantkineticsound
Which part of a dandelion plant takes in minerals and water?flowerleafrootstem
Many natural resources are found in Maryland and the surrounding area. Some of these natural resources are renewable and some are nonrenewable. People use both kinds of resources in daily activities. Using natural resources often produces waste products. Which of these natural resources found in Maryland is nonrenewable?coalsoilwaterwood
Which surgery is most like the way a transgenic organism is made?Adelle receives an artificial hip to ease her arthritis.Kwan receives a pacemaker to regulate his heartbeat.Hector receives a replacement heart valve from a cow.Denise receives a kidney donated by her identical twin.
Use the information to answer the question. Over the last 150 years, the use of fossil fuels has increased, resulting in more carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some scientists think that these atmospheric gases will result in global warming. Scientists have recorded data on global temperature changes and have predicted possible changes in sea level that may affect Maryland residents. Using fossil fuels in the United States will most likely contribute to rising sea levels globally byincreasing oxygen levelsdecreasing oxygen levelsincreasing carbon dioxide levelsdecreasing carbon dioxide levels
Clouds are formed from tiny drops of water that are light enough to float in the air. As these drops bump into each other, they form larger drops. What happens when these drops become too heavy to float in the air?The drops form fog.The drops evaporate.The drops fall as rain.The drops become air.
The shape of a riverbed changes over time as a result of which gradual process?erosiondissolvingplate shiftingcompaction
Which statement explains why daylight and darkness occur on Earth?The Earth rotates on its axis.The Sun rotates on its axis.The Earth's axis is tilted.The Earth revolves around the Sun.
Which force causes a soccer ball to fall to the ground after it has been kicked up in the air?erosionfrictiongravitymagnetism
Which event will occur in an area after a major flood?a decrease in the erosion of riverbanksa decrease in the number of native plantsan increase in the number of animal habitatsan increase in the diversity of insect species
What type of force keeps the planets orbiting the Sun?gravitationalmagneticelectricalnuclear
Which gas could cause a glowing splint to burst into flame?NeonOxygenNitrogenCarbon dioxide
Dr. Wagner is investigating a newly discovered, disease-causing agent. She determines that one structure in the agent is double-stranded RNA. What kind of agent is Dr. Wagner studying?a virusa protista fungusa bacterium
Which activity is an important function of nucleases?repairing the double strand of DNAconcentrating RNA into a nucleolusmaintaining homeostasis of nucleoplasmdissolving the nuclear membrane during mitosis
Which best explains why it is important for a doctor's office to keep accurate records of the medicines prescribed for their patients?to know how many people take medicinesto keep track of all of the people who are sickto keep track of the next scheduled appointmentsto know if there is a risk for harmful side effects
When light hits a mirror, most of the light isrefracted.reflected.absorbed.transmitted.
A plant scientist is developing a new fertilizer called Hypergrow. She designs an experiment to test whether Hypergrow helps plants grow faster than Supergrow, a fertilizer already on the market. Which of the following should the scientist do with light during the experiment?Apply the same amount of light to all the plants.Apply only green light to all the plants.Flash the lights to simulate a partly cloudy day.Keep the plants in darkness.
The boiling point of water in degrees Celsius is0°C.32°C.100°C.212°C.
A student sorted mineral samples into two groups: dull and shiny. Which of the following properties did the student use to sort the mineral samples into groups?cleavagecolorlusterstreak
A 13-year-old boy has blue eyes. Which statement concerning his eye color is correct?It is a result of asexual reproduction.It is a result of childhood nutrition.It is an inherited characteristic.It is a personal choice.
Radioactive waste from nuclear power plants is sealed in containers and deeply buried in the ground. Sealing and burying waste reduces the chances that water will become contaminated. At which point in the water cycle would radioactive contamination most likely be found?rainfoggroundwatersurface water
The early Greeks are credited with many valid concepts in astronomy. Some of their theories were correct; some were later proven incorrect. One theory was that Earth was the center of the universe and that other planets circled Earth. The Greeks thought Earth did not move because its movement was not obvious from the surface of the planet. The Greeks also believed that an invisible sphere surrounding our planet contained the stars. This sphere rotated, explaining the apparent movement of constellations over time. Early Greeks also developed theories about the relationship between the moon and Earth. Why is the same side of the moon always visible from Earth?The far side of the moon does not reflect sunlight.The moon stays in one location while Earth revolves around it.The period of rotation and the period of revolution for the moon are about the same.The moon rotates clockwise on its axis while Earth rotates counterclockwise on its axis.
Sodium chloride (NaCl) is formed in a chemical reaction between sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl_{2}). What is sodium chloride?an elementa mixturea compoundan atom
Which group of organisms is most responsible for changing the composition of Earth's early atmosphere?algaefungireptilesangiosperms
A litter of kittens have traits that are similar to both the mother cat and the father cat. Which best explains this situation?The kittens are provided the same kind of milk from their mother as they grow.The kittens inherit some of their traits from their mother and some from their father.The kittens are kept at the same temperatures by their mother when they are first born.The kittens are taught by their parents to have similar traits.
Jessica is making fruit punch for her friends. She pours the powder into a container with sugar and water. Which of these best describes what happens to the sugar?It expands.It dissolves.It condenses.It evaporates.
The motion of atoms and molecules in a substance isthermal energy.chemical energy.mechanical energy.electromagnetic energy.
Which features form when magma emerges between two diverging oceanic plates?ocean trenchesfault boundariesmid-ocean ridgescomposite volcanoes
Research has shown that specialization of stem cells into specific cell types results, in part, from cell shape. What provides a specialized cell with its shape?number of mitochondriapresence of a nucleusstructure of the cytoskeletonsalt concentration of cytoplasm
Nicole is learning about the characteristics of different vertebrates. Which is a common characteristic of mammals?They all live on land.They all have hair or fur.They are all good swimmers.They all live in warm climates.
Which two processes are common to all living things?flying and breathingmigrating and reproducingusing nutrients and growingeliminating waste and hibernating
Acid rain can damage limestone buildings and marble statues. It can also harm organisms living in ponds and other ecosystems. Which pollutant in the atmosphere causes most of the acid rain?fluorocarbons from aerosol spray cansnitrous oxide from volcanic eruptionssulfur dioxide from burning fossil fuelssoil particles from the use of farm equipment
Ospreys are birds that eat fish. Where would an osprey most likely live?near a forestnear a marshnear a desertnear a prairie
Which of these best describes wind energy?limitedrenewabledamaginginexpensive
Euglena is a single-celled photosynthetic organism. Clover is a multicellular green plant. Which of the following activities is carried out by both euglena and clover?using light energy to produce sugarproducing sex cells for reproductionmoving nutrients to specialized tissuestransmitting impulses along nerve pathways
A glass of ice water is placed on a table. After 10 minutes, there are drops of water on the outside surface of the glass. Which change in phase caused the drops of water?Liquid water in the air evaporated into a gas.Liquid water in the air condensed into a solid.Water vapor from the air evaporated into a liquid.Water vapor from the air condensed into a liquid.
The list below gives some symptoms of people with the common cold. Symptoms of the Common Cold stuffy nose low fever sore throat cough Which body system is most affected by the common cold?NervousDigestiveCirculatoryRespiratory
The formation of the Grand Canyon has most likely taken how long?several yearshundreds of yearsthousands of yearsmillions of years
Which health condition is an infectious disease?pneumonia caused by microorganismsheart problem caused by a high-fat dietlung cancer caused by smokingeye damage caused by ultraviolet light
Which statement describes a characteristic of both sexual and asexual reproduction?The processes require egg cells.New cells are produced.Two parents are required.The processes produce genetically unique offspring.
Which activity is most likely to add pollutants to the environment?watering a gardenpulling weeds from a lawninstalling a wooden fenceburning leaves
Which is the best example of a parasitic relationship?a woodpecker nesting in a cavity of a dead treea tapeworm absorbing food in the digestive tract of a wolfa polar bear hunting a seal for fooda hummingbird transferring pollen between flowers
What is a benefit of using technology, such as robotics, in manufacturing?decreased production costdecreased productivityincreased number of manual-labor jobsincreased number of design flaws
Warm air masses that rise over Earth's equator move north or south. This movement is primarily the result of which of the following processes?conductionconvectioninsulationradiation
A new moon occurs about everyday.year.week.month.
Which statement is true?All fungi are multicellular heterotrophs.All fungi are single-celled heterotrophs.All animals are multicellular heterotrophs.All animals are single-celled heterotrophs.
A leaf is covered in mud during a landslide. After one million years, this leaf will most likely be ___.a fossilan animal speciesa new plant speciesa nonrenewable fuel
A certain snake species in an ecosystem eats small rodents. If a bird species is introduced into the ecosystem that also eats small rodents, which of these will most likely increase?parasitismmigrationmutualismcompetition
Which characteristic would a scientist most likely maintain throughout an investigation?being open to new ideassharing limited researchfocus on completing research firstfocus on formulating conclusions
Plant cells use special parts to capture sunlight. The parts use the sunlight to make food. Where will you find the most of these parts in a plant?rootsstemsleavesflowers
Which is the best example of something that has kinetic energy?a rock sitting at the top of a steep hilla tennis ball rolling across the courta picture hanging on the walla piece of wood before it is burned
Corals are small marine organisms that live in groups and make hard outer skeletons to protect their bodies. Over time, these outer skeletons can build up to make large coral reefs. Which of the following statements best describes one way the formation of a coral reef changes the ocean ecosystem?It makes the ocean water saltier.It removes sand from the ocean floor.It causes ocean waves to become stronger.It creates a habitat for some ocean animals.
A magnet and a metal paper clip have the strongest magnetic attraction when the distance between them is4 centimeters8 centimeters12 centimeters16 centimeters
High average daily temperature and heavy annual precipitation are found in adesert.grassland.rainforest.tundra.
Computers have devices called heat sinks designed to lower the temperature of a computer by scattering produced heat into the surrounding area. Which type of energy is kept away from a computer by a heat sink?electricalchemicalthermalnuclear
In the first step of making some ceramic cups, the following manufacturing process is used. Liquid clay is poured into a mold, allowed to solidify, then removed from the mold. What is the name of this manufacturing process?castingmillingfinishingrefining
The first telescopes were invented hundreds of years ago. Which was discovered as a result of this invention?the moons of Jupiterthe bacteria that causes diseasethe deep-sea trenches in the oceanthe parts of a plant that perform photosynthesis
Which of these best demonstrates the characteristics of science?One student lifts a rock and skips it across a stream.One student thinks about rocks and writes down his opinion.Two students study a rock and then compare their observations.Two students remove rocks from a garden and then plant flowers.
Which type of tissue functions to move the bones?skinbloodmusclebrain
What process in the atmosphere protects people from the ultraviolet rays in sunlight?Ozone absorbs ultraviolet light.Nitrogen reflects ultraviolet light.Water vapor scatters ultraviolet light.Carbon dioxide blocks ultraviolet light.
Which statement best describes a bacterial cell?It contains more than one cell.It is a complete organism.It is part of a larger organism.It contains different kinds of cells.
Visible light in the electromagnetic spectrumis a broad band within the spectrum.is a narrow band within the spectrum.makes up 50 percent of the spectrum.makes up more than 75 percent of the spectrum.
Which of the following is the best example of a part of the propulsion system of a tractor?enginefront headlighthoodsteering wheel
A homeowner wants to use a renewable source of energy to heat the home. Which of these would be the best to use?coalgasoilsolar
How do sprouting plants exhibit positive gravitropism?The roots turn downward.The roots move horizontally.The leaves face toward the Sun.The stems curl around supports.
A student picked up a small rock using a magnet. The rock probably containedquartz.diamond.aluminum.iron.
Grasses, shrubs, and trees are called producers because they makewatercarbon dioxidemineralsfood
How does the buying and selling of a popular species of rainforest animal as pets have a negative effect on the rainforest ecosystem?The rate of photosynthesis may decrease.There is a probability of genetic variability.The number of symbiotic relationships increases.It could lead to the potential extinction of those animals.
Plants that can live in sandy soils most likely have the ability to withstandfires.salt.cold temperatures.dry conditions.
Which characteristic of an element determines its placement in the periodic table?masssizenumber of neutronsnumber of protons
Approximately what percentage of the electromagnetic spectrum is visible light?more than 75%50%25%less than 10%
Two boxes, A and B, both contain the same number of nitrogen gas molecules. The gas molecules in box A have twice the average speed of the molecules in box B. Which of the following best describes the nitrogen gas in box A?The nitrogen gas in box A has a greater mass than the nitrogen gas in box B.The nitrogen gas in box A has a greater density than the nitrogen gas in box B.The nitrogen gas in box A has a greater temperature than the nitrogen gas in box B.The nitrogen gas in box A has a greater specific gravity than the nitrogen gas in box B.
People use many tools to help measure changes. Which person is measuring a change?A sports player scores a goal.A scientist gives a weather report.A friend watches a television show.A nurse checks the temperature of a patient.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infects the cells that coordinate the human immune response. When these cells are killed or compromised, the body cannot effectively protect itself from infection. Which cells does HIV infect?natural killer T cellsregulatory T cellscytotoxic T cellshelper T cells
Which trait can children inherit from their parents?long hairfavorite colorbrown eyesbroken arm
Which tool would be best for students to use to observe and measure plant cells?microscopehand lensmetric rulertriple-beam balance
For a plant to stay alive indoors, where does it need to be placed?In a dry areaIn a dark roomOn a plant standNear a sunny place
Which type of adaptation allows an animal to deceive its predator?large sizeprotective colorationscent glandsleathery skin
Which occurs as a result of the rotation of Earth about its own axis?the water cycleseasons of the yearsunrises and sunsetsglobal climate changes
Theresa studied different forms of energy. Which is the best way of expressing the amount of mechanical energy exerted by a force?kilowattskilocaloriesnewton-metersfoot-pounds per second
The water cycle includes which processes?evaporation, condensation, precipitationmetamorphosis, evaporation, respirationprecipitation, perspiration, mitosisfixation, decomposition, respiration
Which plant is grown for food?RiceTobaccoOrchidCotton
Which cell function is most directly dependent on the cytoskeleton?transport of material inside the cellresponse of the cell to external pathogensstorage of energy in stable long-term formsdirection of cellular activity
When birds fly south for the winter, they are exhibitingcourtship.mimicry.learned behavior.instinctive behavior.
When a plane flies, it travels through air that contains gases, liquids, and solids. This area is best described as theatmosphere.lithosphere.biosphere.hydrosphere.
How would the woodpecker population in a forest area most likely be affected if a housing development is built in that area?They would produce more offspring.They would change the color of their feathers.They would experience a decrease in available food.They would experience a decrease in competition.
Where is water most likely to be brackish?sealakeriverestuary
The amount of elements heavier than hydrogen is constantly increasing in the universe. Which best identifies the bodies in which this change is taking place?starsplanetsgalaxiessolar systems
The discovery of a fossilized animal with teeth, a long bony tail, and feathered wings helped to establish which evolutionary sequence?rodents to batsreptiles to birdsaquatic organisms to land-based organismsinvertebrates to flying organisms
What does the mechanical energy of a system include?the sum of the potential and kinetic energythe difference of the potential and kinetic energyonly the kinetic energyonly the potential energy
On a class field trip, Zach took a walk through the woods using his senses. Zach made observations on the different sights, smells, and sounds in the woods. What system transferred the observations from his senses to his brain?nervous systemdigestive systemcirculatory systemrespiratory system
Louis was investigating physical and chemical changes in matter. Which of these changes that Louis found involves a chemical change in matter?evaporation of watergrinding of rockmelting of icerusting of iron
A ball is thrown up into the air. Which force causes the ball to fall to the ground?frictiongravitymagnetismelectricity
An octopus releases black ink into the water when feeling threatened. What does this most likely help an octopus do?find shelterhunt for foodswim fasterescape enemies
Which method would be best for scientists to use to determine the absolute age of a Precambrian igneous rock?index fossilslaw of superpositionradiometric datinglaw of original horizontality
A mouse's rate of carbon dioxide output increased. Which of the following most likely happened?The mouse went to sleep.The mouse ate some food.The mouse started running.The mouse detected an odor.
Deer are plants-eaters. A winter storm kills many of the plants deer eat. The storm will most likely result in the deershedding a lot of fur.traveling in a herd.becoming thin.feeding on meat.
Students measured the elevation changes in a large park near their school. Which of the following would be the best way to report their findings?line graphtopographic mapcolor-coded chartspreadsheet data table
Which of the following is the best example of a wave?a stone rolling downhilla vehicle traveling on a bumpy roada string vibrating on a guitara grasshopper jumping up and down occasionally
Louisa needs to demonstrate a solution to her class. Which is the best example of a solution?mixing salt and peppermelting butterstirring salt into watermelting an ice cube
Which action would most likely reduce air pollution caused by cars?drive a longer routepurchase a larger cartake fewer car tripsuse smaller tires
How is a telephone able to transmit sound?It conducts vibrations from speaker to receiver.It magnifies a person's voice.It carries the sounds through wires.It converts vibrations to electrical signals.
Which cellular structure in an animal cell helps maintain homeostasis by controlling the transportation of substances into and out of the cell?vacuolecell wallmitochondrioncell membrane
Which of the following was invented by Benjamin Franklin?bifocal lenstelescope lenstelephonecamera
The engine of an automobile is part of which type of system?structurepropulsionguidancecontrol
Which event most likely takes place as the result of crustal movement along transform boundaries?earthquakesvolcanic activitymountain buildingtrenches
The function of a plant's roots is to take inlight and waterlight and airnutrients and waternutrients and soil
The theory of plate tectonics provides the current explanation for the way in whichstars change.continents move.rocks are formed.tides are produced.
An organism eats grass and is preyed upon by a carnivore. Which categories describe this organism?producer and consumerconsumer and herbivoredecomposer and producerherbivore and decomposer
Which substance is necessary for burning to take place?ozoneoxygenhydrogencarbon dioxide
Moths undergo complete metamorphosis. Which stages does a moth's life cycle include?egg, larva, and pupaegg, nymph, and pupanymph, larva, and pupanymph, egg, and larva
In humans, a V-shaped hairline is dominant over a straight hairline. If one parent is homozygous for a V-shaped hairline ( HH ) while the other parent is homozygous for a straight hairline ( hh ), what is the probability that the offspring of these parents will have a straight hairline?0%50%75%100%
Where would electrons most likely be located in an atom?with the quarkswith the neutronsoutside the nucleusnear the protons
Spring tides occur during which lunar phases?first quarter and last quarterfull moon and new moonwhen the moon is waxingwhen the moon is waning
A magnet can generate an electric current in a wire if the magnet is close enough to the wire and if the magnet is alsostrong.weak.at rest.in motion.
Which of the following symbiotic relationships is considered parasitic?ticks feeding on a dogbees transporting pollen from flowerspilotfish swimming under sharksbirds eating the insects from the back of a hippopotamus
What will most likely affect your adult height?The height of your parentsThe height of your brothers and sistersYour hair colorYour weight
The winter solstice occurs on either December 21 or 22, depending on the year. Which of the following statements best explains why the time of the year the winter solstice occurs has the least amount of daylight in Massachusetts?Earth is farthest away from the Sun on the winter solstice.Earth's rotational speed on its axis is greatest on the winter solstice.Earth is traveling around the Sun with the greatest speed on the winter solstice.Earth's Northern Hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun on the winter solstice.
Maryland has many renewable and nonrenewable natural resources. Which group contains only renewable resources found in Maryland?wind, oil, coalfish, coal, windoil, water, treestrees, water, fish
Which part makes a plant cell different from an animal cell?cell membranecell wallcytoplasmnucleus
Which of the following has a warmer average surface temperature than Earth?MarsMoonPlutoVenus
Sound waves are not able to travel througha clouda vacuummetalwater
Scientists study fossils to learn about extinct plants and animals. Which of these is the best example of a fossil?a footprint in a rocka seashell under watera leaf in a mudpuddlea bone on top of a sand pile
When an egg and sperm form an embryo, the offspring that is formed will have genetic traits that areinherited from only one parent.created by the environment.passed on from two parents.learned from siblings.
Turgor pressure in the cells of plant roots is strong enough to eventually crack the rocks in which they grow. What machine redirects force this way?a pulleya wedgean inclined planea wheel and axle
Daphnee is going to build a model of the solar system for her science project. She decides that a meter (m) will represent one astronomical unit (AU) in her model. Based on this scale, how far away from the Sun would she need to place Earth?one metertwo metersthree metersfour meters
A lizard in a desert sits on a warm rock. Where does the heat energy in the rock come from?the Sunthe lizard's skindeep within Earththe decay of plant materials
What is the major cause of ocean waves?windMoon's gravitysalinityEarth's rotation
What type of graph would be best for recording plant growth over a one-week period?pie chartline graphscatterplothistogram
A scientist compares ancient animal tracks to modern animal tracks. Which conclusion is the scientist most likely to reach?Some ancient animals and some modern animals walk on four legs.Most ancient animals and most modern animals hunt animals for food.The same animals that lived long ago also live today.All animals can walk.
A group of citizens want to have a statue built out of marble. They want to place it in a climate that has a slow rate of chemical weathering. In which type of climate would it be best to place the statue for the slowest rate of chemical weathering?hot and drycold and dryhot and humidcold and humid
According to scientists, donkeys and horses share a common ancestor. Which evidence shows that the two organisms are related?Both are tall.Both run fast.They have the same diet.They have the same bones in their limbs.
Which relationship is mutualistic?an insect that lives and feeds on the body of an alligatoran ant that lives on a plant and defends the plant from other insectsa bird that migrates to follow the movements of the butterflies that it eatsa deer that eats one kind of plant, which allows another kind of plant to grow in its place
In humans, B is the allele for brown eyes and b is the allele for blue eyes. Two brothers both have brown eyes, but one of them has both the B and b alleles while the other only has B alleles. Which statement is true about the brothers?They have the same genotype and phenotype.They have different phenotypes and genotypes.They have the same phenotype but different genotypes.They have the same genotype but different phenotypes.
Which of the following is broken down in the body to release energy?sugar.water.salt.oxygen.
Which property is thought to characterize objects in the Oort Cloud?They are composed mostly of iron.They are composed mostly of ice.They regularly revolve near the Sun.They regularly replenish water on Earth.
Sound travels as awave without a medium.series of compressions only.pattern of up and down vibrations.pattern of compressions and rarefactions.
Astronomers have been studying objects that are very bright and appear to be very far away. They have since concluded that these objects are distant galaxies with giant black holes at their center known aspulsars.quasars.supernovas.binary stars.
Which unit of measurement should be used to describe the  mass of an apple?gramliterminutemeter
Scientists have created trains that use magnets to make the trains float above the tracks as they travel. These trains float becausethe track is waxedthe like poles repelthe train has a low densitya chemical change occurs
One role of a producer in a food chain is to providewater for plantssunlight for plantsnutrients for animalsshelter for animals
Tectonic motion caused tension between plates in Earth's crust. A sudden release of this energy occurred. Based on this information, which event happened?subsidenceearthquakevolcanic eruptionmeteoroid impact
The teacher heats a pot of water. Once the water reaches 100°C, which point has the water reached?boilingmeltingfreezingevaporating
What is the major cause of seasonal changes?tilt of the Earth's axisEarth changing its distance from the Sunchanging patterns in wind and ocean currentscycles in the amount of energy released by the Sun
In 1989, the unusually low snowpack in portions of the Sierra Nevada Mountains led to a widespread emergence of Edith's checkerspot butterflies in April. In these regions, flowers do not appear until May. What was the most likely result of the early emergence of these butterflies?Most butterflies did not survive.Most butterflies reproduced earlier.Most butterflies switched to other food sources.Most butterflies adapted to the new environment.
Which scientist developed the mathematical models used to describe the changes in the motion of objects as well as the forces that cause the change in motion?DaltonNewtonAristotlePtolemy
Which natural event would take the longest time to happen?a cloud forminga mountain forminga pond evaporatinga river flooding its banks
Which property of a substance indicates whether the substance is a liquid or a solid at room temperature?melting pointelectrical conductivityflexibilitysolubility
Which organelle converts glucose to energy for cellular work?nucleusmitochondrionvacuolechloroplast
The length of a year is determined by the amount of time it takesthe Moon to revolve around Earth.Earth to revolve around the Sun.Earth to rotate on its axis.the Sun to rotate on its axis.
A tick attaches to a deer and consumes blood, harming the deer. This is an example of which type of relationship?predator-preymutualismparasite-hostcommensalism
Cactus plants grow best in environments (habitats) that arehot and dry.hot and wet.cold and dry.cold and wet.
Where does water in a lake get most of its energy to evaporate?The sun heating the lakeGreen plants living in the lakeStreams entering the lakeCold springs under the lake
A scientist trying to identify an unknown liquid may heat the liquid. Which would be the best reason for the scientist to heat the liquid?to observe a color changeto get rid of most impuritiesto identify the boiling pointto collect gases for additional study
During a laboratory investigation, a student cracks a clean, empty Erlenmeyer flask. It does not break, but it can no longer be used. Where should the flask be placed?trash canbiohazard bagbroken glass binhazardous waste bin
A light bulb transforms electrical energy into light energy. A light bulb also transforms electrical energy intoheat energypotential energymagnetic energymechanical energy
Jonas needs to split a log. He has a sledge hammer. What other tool should he also use to split the log?a levera pulleya wedgea fulcrum
Hurricanes are driven by the energy they get from ocean water. Which property of water allows it to retain the energy needed to power a hurricane?low vapor pressurehigh specific heathigh surface tensionlow freezing point
Which organisms contribute most to the decomposition of dead organisms?snakesvirusesinsectsbacteria
What is one difference between birds and reptiles?Birds lay eggs and reptiles do not.Reptiles are meat-eaters and birds are not.Birds breathe oxygen and reptiles do not.Reptiles are cold-blooded and birds are not.
The ounce, the pound, and the ton are units oftime.weight.length.distance.
A student uses clay to construct a model of Earth. Which layer of the model should be the thinnest layer?the layer representing the mantlethe layer representing the outer corethe layer representing the inner corethe layer representing the crust
A scientist observes that both birds and snakes in the same ecosystem depend on the same mouse species as a food source. The relationship between the birds and the snakes is an example ofpredation.mutualism.competition.commensalism.
Animals get energy from the food they eat. What is the original source of this energy?the soilthe water cyclethe Sunfertilizers
Many human activities, such as driving a car, cause the release of air pollutants. Which substance is a common air pollutant when driving a car?carbon monoxidechlorinenitrogeniron oxide
Which environment would most likely have rich, fertile soil?a desert plaina coastal beacha mountain peaka flood plain
In 1785, James Hutton, stated that evidence of past occurrences can be used to explain events which happen today. Which could most likely be used to explain an event in the geologic past?sunspotsearthquakeswave patternscloud formations
The elements sulfur (S) and oxygen combine to form a substance called sulfur dioxide (SO2). Sulfur dioxide is also formed when coal and oil are burned. Sulfur dioxide can best be described asa metalan atoma compounda nonreactive gas
If a pond is polluted by soap that has phosphate, this pollutant will cause the algae to quickly reproduce. Which will most likely increase in the pond if this happens to the algae?sulfuroxygennitrogencarbon dioxide
In order to carry out the functions of life, organisms musthave more than one type of cell.be exposed to sunlight.have at least one cell.be able to move.
A roller coaster is climbing up the highest hill on its track. At which point will the front car of the coaster most likely have its greatest potential energy?at the bottom of the highest hillat the top of the highest hillat the start of the trackat the end of the track
What is the mass of an asteroid with a speed of 200 m/s and a momentum of 2,000 kg x m/s?10 kg1,800 kg2,200 kg400,000 kg
Some scientists study images of very distant celestial bodies. Where is the best location for the types of telescopes that can provide the scientists with the clearest images.at sea levelin outer spaceon mountain topsat higher latitudes
How do people get energy and nutrients?breathing clean airexercising and playinggetting plenty of resteating healthy food
Which action is a learned characteristic of a newborn horse?nursingwalkingsleepingbreathing
An earthquake is caused by sudden shifts in which of the following layers of Earth?outer corecrustinner coremesosphere
A black bear's diet includes nuts, berries, honey, insects, and fish. Black bears aredecomposers.herbivores.omnivores.prey.
The news often talks about how global warming could change environmental conditions on Earth. Which best explains why global warming is such a concern?Glaciers will advance.The sea level will rise.Earthquake activity will increase.The overall temperature will decrease.
Animal cells perform functions using energy that is derived from glucose (C6H12O6). Which molecule is required for animal cells to obtain the most energy possible from a molecule of glucose?wateroxygenlactic acidcarbon dioxide
Stomata are tiny pores located on the leaves of plants. These pores permit the exchange of gases between air in the environment and plant cells located inside the leaf. Which tissue performs a similar function in vertebrates?The cornea in the eyeThe alveoli in the lungsThe chambers in the heartThe salivary glands in the mouth
When crossing parents with genotypes Rr and rr, what will be the percentages of the genotypes of the offspring?75% Rr, 25% rr50% Rr, 50% rr100% Rr100% rr
Which information will best help scientists determine if an object is a comet, an asteroid, or a meteoroid?the object's diameterthe object's compositionthe shape of the object's orbitthe speed at which the object travels
In an ocean ecosystem, dead organisms such as fish and plankton sink to the bottom of the ocean. Which organisms break down and recycle the dead organisms?algaebacteriamolluskssponges
Which is the best description of the brightness of the Sun?It is less bright than planets.It is brighter than other stars.It is of average brightness compared to planets.It is of average brightness compared to other stars.
Which process passes genetic information from plants to their offspring?germinationpollinationphotosynthesisadaptation
What must happen in order for scientific data to be verified through repetition?Accurate records must be kept.Modern technology must be used.Investigations must be conducted by trained scientists.Observations must be made by more than one scientist.
Which particle type can be identified as being from a specific element?electronatomneutronproton
Which of the following is a chemical property of a substance?mass of 372 greacts with HCldensity of 37 g/cm^3white powder with silver specks
Which structure is found in a plant cell but not in an animal cell?cell wallcell membranecytoplasmnucleus
Which of these best describes a fossil?a geometric pattern formed by a minerala solid element or compound from Earth's crustremains of an extinct organism found in a rock layerbits of weathered rocks and pieces of dead organisms
A student is conducting an investigation using chemicals. Other than goggles and gloves, what else should the student use in order to conduct this investigation safely?lab coatPetri dishBunsen burnerloose-fitting clothing
The boiling point of nitrogen is -196°C. What states of matter are involved when nitrogen boils?solid to gasliquid to gasliquid to solidgas to liquid
The Hubble Space Telescope is a telescope that NASA launched into space in 1990. Scientists most likely prefer to use the Hubble Space Telescope instead of a land-based telescope because it provides better accuracy atpredicting solar eclipses.investigating faraway galaxies.investigating the size of Venus.predicting the phases of the Moon.
Which of the following statements best describes a complex machine?It is designed to move with a motor.It is constructed from machine-made parts.It is made of more than one simple machine.It is built from more than one type of material.
A drug company developed a pill to reduce cases of stomach virus. To test the medication, half of the participants got the pill with the new medicine and half got a sugar pill. Which term best identifies the participants who got a sugar pill?controlexperimentaldependent variableindependent variable
Which information does a student need to differentiate between the speed and the velocity of a vehicle in motion?the rate of the motionthe direction of the motionthe change in the amount of motionthe amount of distance traveled during motion
When do mutations help make an ecosystem more sustainable?when mutations decrease the number of individuals in an ecosystemwhen mutations increase the number of individuals in an ecosystemwhen mutations decrease the number of species in an ecosystemwhen mutations increase the number of species in an ecosystem
Which scientist would be most likely to study the changes in animal populations in nature?BotanistEngineerEcologistVeterinarian
Humans use both renewable and nonrenewable resources. Which human activity uses a nonrenewable resource?building houses with woodusing natural gas to heat homesusing solar energy to power lightsproducing electricity from flowing water
Which best describes the motion of molecules in the gaseous state?They vibrate quickly in place.They spread apart to fill their container.They move at the same speed as in a liquid.They move slowly over one another.
What is the downward movement of water through pores and other spaces in soil due to the force of gravity?percolationevaporationprecipitationcondensation
On Mount Everest the temperature decreases as the altitude increases. The summit of this mountain is in which atmospheric layer?mesospherestratospherethermospheretroposphere
Which energy source is considered nonrenewable?moving waterfossil fuelwindbiomass
A renewable energy source is a source that will not run out. Which is an example of the use of such a source?A coal furnace heating a housea windmill pumping water on a farma kerosene lamp lighting a rooma diesel truck traveling along a road
Which statement best describes why the Moon is visible from Earth?The Moon reflects light from other planets.The Moon reflects light from the Sun.Light is produced by the Moon.Light from Earth illuminates the Moon.
Which statement best explains the reason that electrical wires are made of copper?Copper is strong.Copper is flexible.Copper is a conductor.Copper is an insulator.
Which of these is a natural resource of Virginia?A damA glacierA riverA power plant
Insulin is a chemical that is released by the endocrine system to increase the absorption of glucose by the body's cells. After which activity would insulin levels in a healthy body increase?drinking watertaking a napswimmingeating
An engineer was given an assignment to build a model rocket. The main requirement was that it had to build it out of a metal that could release the energy that built up when reentering the atmosphere of Earth. What property should the engineer concentrate on the most when designing the rocket?densityductilityspecific heatboiling point
Which color of light is produced when all of the colors of visible light in the electromagnetic spectrum are combined?graywhiteblackbrown
A company is making prototypes for a new computer system. Which of the following statements best describes an advantage of making several different prototypes?They can be tested at the same time.They can be produced in large numbers.They will be bought by many different users.They will be sold for more than they cost to build.
What is the function of the nucleus in a cell?provides energyprovides nutrientscontrols activitycontrols movement
A tree is a renewable resource because it can beburned in a fire.made into lumber.eaten by some organisms.replaced with a newly planted tree.
How does the presence of organic matter contribute to good soil?It adds nutrients to the soil.It helps the soil to dry out.It keeps the soil cool.It destroys bacteria in the soil.
A wild turkey's forest community includesinsectsrainfallsoilwind
Which of the following travels from neuron to neuron as information is transmitted?electrochemical impulsesRNA strandstransport vesicles high in ATPmechanical forces
During which process do cells use oxygen to release stored energy?photosynthesisrespirationcirculationdigestion
Which of the following has the ability to change the state of matter?heatwindlightsound
Many things can contribute to the development of a theory. A student made a list of some things that might help scientists develop a theory. Observations Calculations Conversations Publications From the student's list, which must be used in the development of every theory?ObservationsConversationsPublications and calculationsCalculations and conversations
Ben has a snack with a combination of raisins, chocolate pieces, and nuts. As he eats the snack, Ben picks out all of the raisins. Which best describes the snack Ben is eating?a compoundan elementa solutiona mixture
Capillary walls are only one layer of cells thick. Passage of oxygen into and out of the capillaries is controlled most by which process?collection of waste materialbreakdown of materialsdiffusion of materialstorage of materials
The average car uses about 25% of the available energy in each gallon of gasoline. The energy not used to run the car is released as heat and sound. Which statement best describes this occurrence?Energy conversion reduces efficiency.Energy is destroyed at high temperatures.Energy loss increases the order in a system.Energy levels increase as conversions take place.
How long does it take light from the nearest star other than the Sun to reach Earth?Less than 1 secondAbout 1 hourAbout 1 monthAbout 4 years
Spider webs help spidersavoid predators.capture food.stay dry.keep warm.
Pouring water over a sloping tray of soil demonstrates howsoil can be washed away.soil creation may take years.river sediment forms a delta.planting grass protects the soil.
Which layer of Earth is divided into plates?MantleCrustInner coreOuter core
The breakdown of ozone into oxygen results from the electromagnetic absorption spectrum of ozone. This production of oxygen in the ozone layer is caused by exposing ozone to a strong source of which type of electromagnetic radiation?radio wavesmicrowavesinfrared lightultraviolet light
Which best describes what keeps the Moon orbiting around Earth?speedgravityweightfriction
The hypothesis of an expanding universe required which type of validation before being accepted as a significant part of scientific theory?a controlled single-variable laboratory testsupport through evidence from numerous observationsproposal of alternative explanations with predictive valuea full-scale replication of each event in the proper sequence
In which type of rock is the fossil imprint of a fern leaf most likely to be found?igneousmetamorphicsedimentaryvolcanic
At certain times of the year, meteor showers can be observed from Earth. Why are these objects from space usually harmless?They are always microscopic.They are closer to the sun than to Earth.They are made of soft, spongy materials.They burn up high in Earth's atmosphere
Which group of animals contains ONLY reptiles?lizard, frog, snaketurtle, lizard, crocodileoctopus, snail, turtlecrab, earthworm, snake
Why is the particular sequence of bases in a segment of DNA important to cells?Some base sequences code for protein production.Some base sequences cause the release of lipids from the nucleus.Some base sequences contain the order of sugars in polysaccharides.Some base sequences produce electrical signals sent to the cytoplasm.
A meteorologist announces that the barometer reading is dropping. What does a barometer measure?wind speedair pressureair temperatureground temperature
A cricket population includes approximately the same number of black and light-brown crickets. Black crickets are easier for birds to locate and eat. Over time, the population begins to consist of only light-brown crickets. The change in the color of the cricket population is a result oflimited resources.natural selection.geographic isolation.climate change.
When nearly vertical rays of solar energy strike a region of the Earth, that area has warm temperatures. What region of the Earth gets nearly vertical rays of solar energy year around?EquatorAustraliaUnited StatesNorth and South Poles
Scientists from around the world would most likely meet at a conference held in Paris, France, tolearn how to speak the same language.work together on scientific research.teach students the importance of education.show other scientists the scientific method.
Ferns belong to any one of about 12,000 species of plants grouped in their own division within the plant kingdom. Ferns are vascular, seedless, flowerless, and reproduce by spores. To which plant group do ferns belong?BryophytaGymnospermAngiospermPteridophyta
A student ties a string around a weight and swings the weight in a circle around her body. If the student represents the Sun and the weight represents Earth, what does the string represent?gravityradiationelectricitymagnetism
Scientists have studied the specific stages in the life cycle of stars. In which stage do stars spend most of their lifetime?red giantblack dwarfwhite dwarfmain sequence
How does the energy in each trophic level of an energy pyramid compare to the energy in the preceding level?It has about 5% of the energy from the level below it.It has about 10% of the energy from the level below it.It has about 15% of the energy from the level below it.It has about 20% of the energy from the level below it.
The texture of soil depends primarily on themass of the soil.water in the soil.composition of the soil.vegetation growing in the soil.
As children grow, their body height usuallydecreasesincreasesremains the same
Which is a force that keeps the planets in orbit around the Sun?inertiagravitymagnetismsolar energy
What is the role of the kidneys in the excretory system?to digest foodto remove toxinsto produce bileto oxygenate blood
Which number is closest to the estimated number of stars in the Milky Way galaxy?200 thousand200 million200 billion200 trillion
Which statement best describes how a mountain range changes over time from wind and water erosion?The mountain range will become faulted.The mountain range will be lifted up.The mountain range will form craters.The mountain range will become rounded.
In a cell, a newly synthesized protein requires modification by the addition of a carbohydrate. Which structure will transport the protein from the site of synthesis to the site of modification?a ribosomethe endoplasmic reticulumthe Golgi apparatusa vacuole
Students notice that in the fall leaves of sugar maple trees turn red, but the leaves of black oak trees turn brown. The students are makingan observationa conclusiona predictionan inference
What instrument should be used to monitor atmospheric pressure changes as a weather system approaches?psychrometerthermometeranemometerbarometer
Which of the following is responsible for determining the traits of an organism?number of phosphatesamount of thyminesequence of nucleotidestype of bond between bases
In which organism can cell walls be found?mothgrasssnakehawk
Isaac Newton is best known for his study ofmotion.weather.body systems.the history of Earth.
Some objects are attracted by magnets. Which object is attracted by a magnet?an iron nailan ice cubea plastic knifea wooden ruler
Which action represents the use of technology to solve a problem?reducing the amount of heartburn with the use of herbal teasanswering mathematical equations with the use of computersbringing down body temperature with the use of a hand fanincreasing the supply of fish with the use of fish farms
When a guitar string is strummed, it produces sound by makingheat.electricity.vibrations.light.
The meanings of mass and weight can often be confused. Which is an example of a change in both mass and weight?visiting the Moona stone eroding in a riverliving on the space stationa ship floating on the ocean
Which of these are scientific classifications for galaxies in the universe?dust, gas, icesmall, medium, largespiral, elliptical, irregularred giant, white dwarf, supernova
A scientist was observing a unicellular organism over a period of time. He noticed that vacuoles kept moving to the same place in the plasma membrane to empty their contents outside the cell. Which organism was he observing?amoebaeuglenaparameciumvolvox
Which form of precipitation is most likely to cause damage when hitting the roof of a car?hailrainsleetsnow
Which tool is best to use when comparing an animal cell to a plant cell?balancecompassmicroscopethermometer
The density of 200 mL of water was determined, and then 20 grams of sugar was dissolved in the water. The student determined the density of the sugar-water solution and recorded the collected data in a table. The sugar in this investigation isthe solute.undergoing chemical change.the solvent.changing from a solid to a gas.
During the year, the angle at which the path of the Sun appears in the sky varies. In the Northern Hemisphere, the path of the Sun appears higher on the horizon during the summer and lower on the horizon during the winter. Which factor most contributes to the variation in the path of the Sun across the sky?the rotation of Earththe tilted axis of Earththe flattening of Earth at the polesthe elliptical shape of the orbit of Earth
Which is the best way to show the percent gas composition in Earth's atmosphere?bar graphline graphpie chartscatterplot
For the reaction between silver nitrate and sodium chloride, which of the following would be a product? AgNo_{3} + NaCl ->AgNaClNO_{3}Na_{3}NOAgCl
Which invention has done the most to help predict weather and warn people of approaching storms?satellitesairplanesbarometersmaps
During the Siberian summer, reindeer graze on young roots, fungi, grass, and other vegetation. In the cold winter months, they migrate south and rely on available, but less nutritious food, such as lichen. Increased snowfall during the entire winter in southern areas would result in reindeer having toreturn to their summer feeding area.hibernate until the snows have stopped.hunt for organisms such as small rodents.move to other areas to compete for resources.
Sir Isaac Newton stated that every object in the universe attracts matter. The attraction depends on the mass of an object and the distance between the objects. What type of force did Newton describe?centripetal forcegeneralized forcecentrifugal forcegravitational force
What season is the Northern Hemisphere experiencing when it is tilted away from the Sun?springsummerautumnwinter
Heat is applied to a beaker of water, raising the water temperature a few degrees. What happens to the water molecules after heat is applied?The molecules spread apart and move more slowly.The molecules spread apart and move more quickly.The molecules come together and move more slowly.The molecules come together and move more quickly.
Which feature is most likely the result of a flowing river?a sand dunea volcanoa canyona glacier
Which organ is the site of gas exchange between the body and the environment?spleenliverlungspancreas
A positively-charged hydrogen ion has a much smaller radius than a neutral hydrogen atom. Which best explains this difference?The nucleus is the least dense region of an atom.Electrons are located far from the nuclei of their atoms.Most of the volume of atoms is filled with the particles they contain.The repulsion of protons and neutrons keeps them on opposite ends of atoms.
How are dormancy and hibernation similar in animals?metabolic rate and body temperature both increasemetabolic rate and body temperature both decreasemetabolic rate increases and body temperature decreasesmetabolic rate decreases and body temperature increases
A small aluminum cube is dropped into a beaker of water to determine the buoyancy. Which of these is not necessary in determining the buoyant force acting on the cube?density of waterdisplaced volumegravitational pull on Earthdensity of the aluminum cube
Before concrete has hardened, it exhibits plasticity. This is an advantage because it allows the concrete tobecome strong as it cures.withstand compression.remain pliable after hardening.be molded into almost any shape.
Which event is an example of inherited behavior?a dog sitting on commanda parrot repeating a phrasea bird flying south for the wintera horse competing in a horse show
A student must explain the role of dead leaves in the ecosystem. Which statement will the student most likely provide to explain the importance of these leaves?The leaves provide shelter to growing seeds.The decay of the leaves provides nutrients to other plants.The leaves release chlorophyll into the grass as they decay.The leaves prevent fungus from growing at the base of the tree.
Which of the following statements is true about organisms that are producers?They use energy from the sun to make food.They absorb energy from a host animal.They get energy from eating living animals.They get energy by breaking down dead plants and animals.
If Earth revolved at a faster rate, what would most likely occur?Annual rainfall would increase.Daylight hours would decrease.Seasons would be shorter.Annual temperature variation would be greater.
The distance from Earth to the Sun is one astronomical unit. Which unit best describes how many astronomical units it is from Earth to the far end of the Milky Way Galaxy?hundredsthousandsmillionsbillions
Which is most likely to cause an organism to become endangered or extinct?habitat lossbehavioral changesincreased reproduction ratealtered migration patterns
What are the characteristics of maritime polar air masses?cool and drywarm and drycool and humidwarm and humid
In an ecosystem, which list of organisms is in the correct order from producer to top-level consumer?field mouse, grass, hawk snakesnake, field mouse, hawk, grassgrass, field mouse, snake, hawksnake, grass, field mouse, hawk
What is a true statement about all foods?All foods are solid.All foods taste good.All foods provide nutrients.All foods should be cooked.
Which of the following is an example of an acidic solution?bleachvinegarsugar watersalt water
When rock particles settle at the bottom of the ocean, they can continue to be buried by other particles. The process of cementation of these particles formsmolten rocks.igneous rocks.sedimentary rocks.metamorphic rocks.
Which of these is part of the description of protein?a folded chain of amino acidsa folded chain of carbohydratesa branched chain of fatty acidsa branched chain of nucleic acids
Lightning from a thunderstorm strikes a 21 tree that falls to the forest floor and dies. During the next few years the dead tree undergoes many changes. What organisms are most likely responsible for the biological and chemical changes to the tree?consumersdecomposerspredatorsproducers
Sodium chloride is formed when sodium and chlorine chemically combine. Which term best describes sodium chloride?mixtureelementsolutioncompound
Which three things do animals need from their environment in order to survive?soil, water, and foodsoil, light, and waterair, food, and waterair, water, and light
Most electricity in the United States is generated using coal, natural gas, nuclear energy, or hydropower. Which of these add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere?coal and natural gasnatural gas and nuclear energynuclear energy and hydropowerhydropower and coal
A student has recorded rainfall amounts for 28 days and uses a calculator to determine the total rainfall. What does the student calculate when she divides the total rainfall by 28?mean rainfallrainfall modemedian rainfallpercentage of rainfall
Which of the following was most likely the cause of the extinction of 60-100 species of native birds in Hawaii since the arrival of colonists?habitat destructionvolcanic eruptionsincreased salinitytidal waves
Which is the correct sequence for the stages in the life cycle of a butterfly?larva; pupa; egg; adultegg; pupa; larva; adultadult; larva; pupa; eggegg; larva; pupa; adult
Oil is an example of a natural resource that is not renewable. Which is another example of an nonrenewable resource?WoodSeawaterSunlightCoal
Students are using hammers to break apart rocks as part of an investigation. The students MUST wear goggles tomagnify the work.keep hair out of their faces.protect their eyes from debris.prevent glare from the light.
How would the Sun appear to an astronaut on Pluto compared with how it looks from Earth?The Sun would appear larger and brighter.The Sun would appear smaller and brighter.The Sun would appear larger and dimmer.The Sun would appear smaller and dimmer.
When using a microscope, it is best to use a wet mount toobserve live organisms.show the interior of sliced objects.highlight objects with chemical dyes.remove debris that is obscuring the object.
A power plant uses chemical energy to produce electricity. What source of energy does the power plant most likely use?windsunlightfossil fueltidal waves
Which subatomic particle has a negative charge?protonneutronelectronquark
Which list gives the correct order of food traveling through the digestive system after it is swallowed?stomach, esophagus, large intestine, small intestine.small intestine, large intestine, esophagus, stomach.esophagus, stomach, large intestine, small intestine.esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine.
Parakeets are birds whose basic plumage color is green. However, parakeets exhibit a wide range of color both in the wild and in captivity. Which process is the source of the wide color variation observed in parakeet populations?speciationadaptationnatural selectiongenetic mutation
In science, old ideas can be changed when new discoveries alter existing information. Which situation is most likely an example of a rethinking of an existing idea?using coal to generate electricitydiscovering a new species of snakedeveloping an antibiotic to treat infectionschanging the definition of the term planet
How does sweat on the skin help the body?Sweat stops sunburn.Sweat cools the body.Sweat feeds the skin.Sweat heals cuts.
How does the Sun power the water cycle?Energy from the Sun evaporates water.Energy from the Sun condenses water.Energy from the Sun precipitates water.Energy from the Sun collects water.
In order to maintain good health, humans shouldeat foods high in fatexercise regularlydrink alcohol oftensmoke tobacco occasionally
Which of the following is an abiotic factor in a river ecosystem?dragonflytroutwaterfrog
When a conclusion is reached after an experiment, which is most likely the first step other scientists might take when checking the conclusion?propose different conclusions from the same datastudy the data to evaluate the conclusionchange current models to fit the conclusiondevelop new technologies based on the conclusion
What allows for some organisms in a population to have an increased survival rate over other organisms of the same species?genetic mutationspecies competitionasexual reproductiongenetic variation
Which environment is best for an organism that sleeps during the day and digs holes in the ground for shelter?wetlandrainforesttundradesert
One difference between a chemical formula and a chemical equation is that the chemical equation showsabbreviations for each element.the number of atoms per element.what elements are in each molecule.the chemical reaction that takes place.
Plants that have stems that store water and no leaves would most likely live in apine forest.grassland.desert.rainforest.
Fossil fuels are considered nonrenewable because theyproduce pollutionare no longer used by humansoften contain microscopic animalstake millions of years to form
A baby bird must eat a lot of food to grow. During which stage of its life cycle is a butterfly most similar to a baby bird?egglarvapupaadult
Which feature results when plates of different densities converge and one plate slips under the other?a faulta ridgea trencha rift zone
Which of these is the BEST sign that the fall season has begun?Plants forming new budsSun shining on flowersGrass being wet in the morningLeaves changing color on trees
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that affects the joints. Which of these events causes the symptoms of this disease?The body's immune system attacks specific tissues.The cells of the immune system begin to grow rapidly.The body's immune system fails to fight off infections.The cells of the immune system are absorbed by antigens.
Chris stirs a cup of hot chocolate. He uses a wooden stick thinking it will stay cooler than a metal spoon. Which activity best describes the student's action?comparing dataasking a questionmaking a predictionforming a conclusion
Which would be best seen through a telescope?a moona cella light raya molecule
A student conducts an investigation testing a material's effectiveness as a heat insulator. Which tool will help the student conduct this investigation safely?a face maskplastic glovesa ventilator hoodinsulated gloves
Which equipment would best be used for an activity on a biochemistry unit?meter stick, microscope, and test tubestest tube, hot plate, and safety gogglesbalance, telescope, and graduated cylinderPetri dish, dissecting equipment, and spring scale
When the fuel in a gasoline engine is burned, the energy conversion is fromchemical to thermal.potential to nuclear.thermal to potential.electrical to kinetic.
Some prokaryotes once classified in the domain Bacteria are now classified asFungi.Plantae.Archaea.Protista.
Which of these is the primary source of energy in food webs?soilsunlightproducerconsumer
An unusual type of fossil clam is found in rock layers high in the Swiss Alps. The same type of fossil clam is also found in the Rocky Mountains of North America. From this, scientists conclude thatglaciers carried the fossils up the mountainsthe Rocky Mountains and the Swiss Alps are both volcanic in originclams once lived in mountains, but have since evolved into sea-dwelling creaturesthe layers of rocks in which the fossils were found are from the same geologic age
The layered mixture of gases surrounding Earth is called theatmospherehydrospherelithospherehemisphere
Paul listens to music through his radio. Which best explains the sound Paul hears?Sounds are fluids that travel through air.Sounds are waves that travel through matter.Sounds are gases that transform into vibrations.Sounds are forms of energy that are converted from light.
Plants are producers because theymake their own foodcan grow in soilneed water to growtake in nutrients
A water hose was left running on a pile of dirt. What feature of stream erosion was most likely being demonstrated?the rate of water flow in a streamthe time it takes for deposition to occur along a streamhow layers of rocks and soil are formed along a streamhow water shapes a stream over time
The best soil mixture for plant growth and drainage issilt, pebbles, and clay.sand, rocks, and clay.humus, clay, and sand.clay, silt, and rocks.
Which of these technologies helps a power company use renewable energy for the production of electricity?hydroelectric powernuclear power plantsnatural gas generatorscoal-fired power plants
Windmills are used to obtain usable energy from wind. Which would be an advantage of using a windmill?Windmills are expensive to build.The wind does not blow all the time.Pollution is not created by windmills.Populations of birds can be reduced by windmills.
Which of these is an example of a new substance being formed?a nail rustinga wall being paintedwater changing to steampaper being folded
Which of these can make a shadow on the ground during the day?RiverAirThunderCloud
Which system protects the body by responding to the presence of a virus?respiratory systemskeletal systemimmune systemexcretory system
The symptoms of influenza infection are partly caused by therapid genetic mutation in infected cells.consumption of the body's energy resources by viruses.release of toxins by viral particles.body's inflammatory response to infected cells.
Which cellular organelle modifies fatty acids?chloroplastmitochondrionGolgi complexendoplasmic reticulum
Which part of Earth's structure exists in the solid phase due to low temperatures?the inner corethe outer corethe lithospherethe asthenosphere
Which sea otter behavior is learned?using fur to trap air for warmthcracking open clams with a rocknursing its young for six monthsclosing its ears under water
The magnetic poles of Earth frequently change location. What is the direct cause of this change in magnetic pole location?molten rock flowing in the asthenosphereconvection cells in the lower mantleturbulence in the liquid outer coreradioactive decay in the solid inner core
Years ago, most family members lived near one another. Today, family members often live all over the country. People are able to live far from their loved ones because of the technologies ofmedicine and computers.manufacturing and home entertainment.refrigeration and heating systems.communication and transportation.
Which two body systems would most directly remove extra fluid from a person's lungs?nervous and digestivenervous and circulatoryrespiratory and digestiverespiratory and circulatory
Sedimentary rock helps scientists piece together the history of Earth most likely using clues fromhumus.soil.gravel.fossils.
The energy that is stored in food originally comes fromairsoilsunlightwater
Which of these shows how frozen water changes as the temperature of the air increases?Gas -> liquid -> solidSolid -> gas -> liquidLiquid -> gas -> solidSolid -> liquid -> gas
Which of the following properties best describes a material's ability to resist scratching?weightflexibilitylengthhardness
Scientists noted that muscles and bones would need physical stress to remain healthy during manned space flights. Which of these had to be planned for because of this need?practicing space walkingcounseling activities for tensionexercising to maintain strengthmonitoring circadian rhythms
If a species of bird stopped reproducing, which of these would happen?The bird's prey species would decrease in number.The food web that the bird belongs to would collapse.Trees where these birds build nests would grow taller.This bird species would eventually disappear from nature.
When performing a new experiment for the first time, a scientist reaches an unexpected conclusion. What must the scientist do in order to have the conclusion accepted by other scientists?write a brief reportrepeat the experimentpurchase new equipmentmake a data chart
Which system produces most of the hormones in the human body?circulatorydigestiveendocrinerespiratory
Which tool should a student use to see the patterns on a small object?balancehand lensthermometergraduated cylinder
Robots are used to help manufacture cars. One problem with this isless waste.lower cost.fewer jobs.more mistakes.
Which two body systems interact to produce antibodies that require essential amino acids?integumentary and circulatory systemsdigestive and reproductive systemsendocrine and respiratory systemsdigestive and immune systems
Which chemical is a compound?helium (He)hydrochloric acid (HCl)hydrogen (H2)nitrogen (N2)
Two spotted leopards produce a litter of four cubs. Three of the cubs are spotted and one is solid black. The black coat is probably what type of trait?dominantrecessivepolygenicsex-linked
Which physical property is used to identify a mineral based on its resistance to being scratched?hardnessdensitycolorstreak
A negatively charged rubber rod was brought near some small pieces of paper. The rod's charges repelled the negative charges in the pieces. Which of the following caused the repulsion of the negative charges?conductiongravitationinductioninsulation
Mangrove trees are affected by several factors. Which is an abiotic factor contributing to the energy cycle of a mangrove ecosystem?bacteriaclimatefungirocks
What does a light-year measure?timemassdistancebrightness
Which of these structures in a plant cell allows a plant to make food?cell wallcytoplasmchloroplastchromosomes
Patricia and her classmates are visiting different rocky areas in the city. They want to know what kind of rocks can be found in each area. If the investigation is done correctly, what will Patricia and her classmates do each time they visit an area?draw the rock shapescount the rock numbersrecord the rock types and locationsmeasure the rock masses and lengths
The electrical charge of the nucleus of an atom is +12. How many electrons does the atom have in its neutral state?6121824
Which of these is a reason that scientists revise theories?public opinion in favor of a revised theorycorporate sponsorship of a revised theorygovernment policy based on a revised theoryexperimental results that support a revised theory
Which of the following results when hydrogen and chlorine chemically bond to form hydrogen chloride?a mixturea solutiona compounda precipitate
Scientists are able to conclude that a forested ecosystem existed in Antarctica millions of years ago by studyingthe current climate.the fossil record.glacial movement.seafloor spreading.
Which Earth movement results in day and night?erosiondepositionrevolutionrotation
Upwelling moves the water of the deep ocean to the ocean's surface. What else does upwelling move to the surface?fishnutrientsphytoplanktondissolved gases
Which body system functions by bringing in oxygen and removing carbon dioxide?endocrinerespiratorydigestiveurinary
A topographic map is primarily used to determine thenumber of continents in the world.location of major cities in the country.elevation of an area.rainfall of desert regions.
A change in the pattern of warm ocean currents can cause a climate change byreleasing thermal energy in irregular spurts.absorbing thermal energy from the Sun's rays.moving thermal energy from one place to another.increasing the ocean's capacity for absorbing thermal energy.
Which part of digestion is mainly a chemical change?Teeth break food into small pieces.Throat muscles push food toward the stomach.Stomach acids dissolve food into nutrients.Intestinal cells transport nutrients into the blood.
Which object is best seen with a microscope?human cellcow heartoak leafchicken leg
In which example does an object move because of the force of gravity?a girl hitting a ball with a bata boy pushing a box across the floora girl hammering a nail into a walla boy falling from a tree onto the ground
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was established in 1970 to address problems that existed in the environment. Which is the EPA most likely interested in reducing?the emissions from volcanic activitythe level of pollution caused by peoplethe amount of ozone in the stratospherethe amount of oxygen produced by trees
In order for plants to grow, the cells require nutrients in the form of minerals. The minerals come fromsoil.air.water.pollen.
HIV makes the body vulnerable to secondary infections by targetingmacrophages.helper T-cells.cells.killer T-cells.
A student is investigating the properties of a mineral. The student tests the mineral by putting it under an ultraviolet light. Which property of the mineral can be identified using this test?colorstreaklusterfluorescence
A student plans to grow algal colonies in solutions with different concentrations of liquid fertilizer. Which is a clear and testable hypothesis to guide this investigation?Algae like fertilizer.Fertilizer is good for algae.Fertilizer improves the genetic traits of algae.Algal growth rate increases with fertilizer concentration.
Which process is taking place when water freezes between cracks in rocks?depositionweatheringsedimentationcrystallization
The human body temperature is normally 98.6°F. As a person exercises, the body temperature starts to increase. As a result of the increased body temperature, the perspiration process begins to cool the body. Which best describes what the body is doing when it perspires?increasing osmosisreducing transpirationcontrolling metabolismmaintaining homeostasis
In living organisms, the level of organization from least complex to most complex iscell, tissue, organ, organismcell, organ, tissue, organismtissue, cell, organ, organismtissue, organ, cell, organism
Which type of model best shows the location of underwater ocean ridges?world globesatellite maptopographic mapnautical chart
A student put a metal pot on the stove to boil some water. The metal transferred heat to the water throughradiation.insulation.convection.conduction.
Which feature is a kitten most likely to inherit from its parents?dietcolorhealthindependence
Proteins are compounds formed in the cells of plants and animals. Which element is included in every protein molecule?calciumcarbonfluorinesodium
A rocket is traveling toward space. What force must the rocket act against as it moves away from Earth?inertiagravitymagnetismmomentum
A group of workers needs to move a piano from the second floor of a building. The piano is too wide to fit through the door, so they will lower the piano to the ground through a window. Which tool would be best to help the workers lower the piano from the window?wheel and axleinclined planepulleywedge
Why is a spacesuit inflated like a balloon?to simulate the air pressure of Earthto help astronauts float in outer spaceto protect astronauts from solar radiationto provide an oxygen supply for breathing
Which term best describes the process responsible for cave formation that results from rock being dissolved by groundwater?chemical weatheringglacial movementsedimentationabrasion
What happens to colored sugar when it is added to water?The sugar reacts and colors the water.The sugar becomes white and the water changes color.The sugar evaporates and the water changes color.The sugar dissolves and colors the water.
Which statement about plant and animals cells is true?Both have a cell wall to give them support.Both have a large vacuole to store water.Both use mitochondria to produce energy.Both use chloroplasts to store energy.
Farm fertilizers are often carried by runoff into the Mississippi River and down to the Gulf of Mexico, resulting in algae blooms. Which of these results from the decomposition of the algae blooms?an abundance of dissolved oxygendead zones where there are no fisha reduction in atmospheric carbon dioxidefood webs with rapidly growing populations
Jennifer is jumping rope. Which type of characteristic is she most likely demonstrating?learnedrecessiveinheritedinstinctive
A teacher breaks a bar of pure copper into two different sized pieces. Which is the most likely difference between the two pieces?masstextureboiling pointmelting point
Blood is a fluid made up of several different parts. What level of structural organization best describes blood?a cella tissuean organa system
Scientists found large areas of fossilized wood in a desert in Arizona. The fossilized wood is evidence of the ancient environment. Based on the evidence, what was the ancient environment in this area?forestdesertglaciergrasslands
Ruben is using a compass to find out which direction the wind is blowing. Which of the following would be best for him to observe to help him find the direction of the wind?a flag on a polethe temperature on a thermometerbirds flying above the treesthe shadow of a building
A farmer predicts a new sprinkler will keep water from being wasted. What term best describes this prediction?experimenthypothesisobservationvariable
Tides on Earth are mostly caused by the gravitational pull ofthe Sun.stars.the Moon.asteroids.
When rain falls on the land, some of it is absorbed by surface sediment. How porous the surface sediments are controls how much water is absorbed. Which of the following will most likely result in an area where surface sediment is NOT porous?floodingdroughtstornadoesspring formation
Which of the following parts of a car belongs to its control system?fuel tankhydraulic jacksteering wheelwindshield wipers
Which substance can be used to conduct electricity in a circuit?metalwoodrubberplastic
Which unit is used to express the amount of energy in food?Caloriedegree Celsiusmillilitergram
A student measured how quickly a car rolled down a hill. Which tool should the student have used to measure how quickly the car rolled down the hill?a hand lensa stopwatcha thermometera centimeter ruler
Water at 20 degrees Celsius is placed on a stove. As the water is heated, thermal energy is absorbed by the water. If the water is heated to a maximum temperature of 80 degrees Celsius, what happens as a result of the increased temperature?The potential energy increases.The evaporation decreases.The disorder decreases.The entropy increases.
The electromagnetic spectrum is described as aseries of colors of the rainbow.list of radioactive elements.band of frequencies of light waves.range of conductivity of metals.
Which of the following is most important in producing the seasons on Earth?Earth's gravitational attraction to the Sunthe Moon's revolution around Earththe distance of Earth from the Sunthe tilt of Earth's axis as it revolves around the Sun
Which of the following is designed to convert energy into mechanical work?Electric fanKerosene heaterFlashlightBaking oven
A student hears the sound of a bell. Which of the following carries the sound of the bell to the student?electrical currentsmagnetic signalsradio wavesvibrating air
The first stage of soil formation is the weathering of rock into fine particles. To make a good soil for growing plants, which would be best to add to the rock particles?mineralssandorganic mattersilt
Which best describes a scientific theory?It is still being tested.It is true, once written.It is different for each continent.It is determined in a court of law.
Scientists are studying the factors that influence the climate of a region. In attempts to gather accurate data, the scientists should use data that includes thenumber of earthquakes that occur each year.types of organisms in the environment.number of people living in the area.type of weather that has occurred.
Why do two surfaces get warm when they are rubbed together?The surfaces absorb energy from the air.Friction changes energy of motion to heat energy.Moving objects produce heat energy.Energy is transferred between the two surfaces.
Two high tides and two low tides occur on Earth everyday.hour.week.month.
A book placed on a table is observed to remain stationary. Which statement about the observation would be considered a fact rather than an opinion?The book is not very heavy.The table pushes up on the book.The book probably has a sticky cover.The table is composed of a stronger material than the book.
Having students wash their hands frequently with soap and water will limit the spread of infectious disease byprotecting harmless bacterial cells.changing viral and bacterial nucleic acids.releasing mutated cells from pores.removing viruses and bacteria from the skin.
Which object helps people understand what makes up white light?BarometerPrismMicroscopeThermometer
Water vapor sometimes condenses into stratus clouds that are in contact with the ground. What forms as a result of this process?ozonemethanefogsmoke
One of the main causes of acid rain isWaste from nuclear power plantsSpills from chemical manufacturing plantsGases from burning fossil fuelsGases from aerosol spray cans
Which of these activities makes the MOST air pollution?Storing trash bagsReusing trash bagsBurning trash bagsRecycling trash bags
The Hardy-Weinberg law is only valid whenthe population is small.migration into the population is occurring.immigration into the population is occurring.the population is large.
Deposition of sediment during floods makes the land near some riversacidic.fertile.hilly.unstable.
Old, worn-out rubber tires are called scrap tires. Which way of disposing of scrap tires is best for the environment?burning the tiresdumping the tires in a lakeburying the tires in a landfilltaking the tires to a recycling center
Which material is the best conductor of heat at room temperature?airwatersulfurcopper
A student drops a white tablet into a glass of water, producing carbon dioxide gas. This is a demonstration ofa change of state.a chemical reaction.the creation of matter.the movement of electricity.
Which of these is a structure that is present in all organisms?a tissuea cella stomacha brain
Which set of conditions will produce an electric current in a closed loop of wire?a magnet touching the loop of wirea magnet at rest inside the loop of wirea magnet at rest outside the loop of wirea magnet passing through the loop of wire
Extensive folding of sedimentary rock layers on Earth provides indirect evidence of certain processes occurring throughout Earth's history. Which of these is most likely one of these processes?convective heat loss from Earth's mantleslowing of the rotation of Earth's coreincrease in the density of Earth's atmosphereslow increase in the distance of Earth's orbit
An ice cube melts on a hot summer day because the energy of the particlesdecreases over a period of time and is lost.increases and the particles move apart.causes the particles to move closer together.is converted into potential energy.
The relationship between ticks and a dog can best be described asmutualism.competition.parasitism.commensalism.
Small grasshoppers shed their outer covering as they grow larger. Which animal also sheds its outer covering as it grows larger?frogsnakefishhuman
Two atoms of oxygen combine to form pure oxygen gas. What is the electrical charge of the O_{2} molecules?positivenegativeneutralvariable
Which is not a type of electromagnetic wave?sound wavex-raymicrowaveradio wave
What is one way to help slow down or stop the greenhouse effect?find new coal resources in the earthclean up the litter in neighborhoodsclean up the water pollution in local lakeswalk or ride a bike instead of driving a car
Great distances in space are measured inkilometers.light years.megameters.astronomical units.
Which of the following gives a plant cell its rigid structure?cell membranenucleuscell wallchloroplast
Which alternative energy resource changes part of a river into a lake?solar energygeothermal energyhydropowerbiofuel energy
A student in a laboratory transfers a beaker containing a hot solution from the lab table to a cool water bath. Which of the following parts of the system experiences an increase in heat energy?beakerlab tablesolutionwater bath
Which example best illustrates kinetic energy?a light bulb that is turned ona car that is parked on top of a hilla comet that is flying through spacea battery that is connected to a circuit
Which theory about the origin of the universe states that a densely packed sphere exploded, forming clouds that condensed into galaxies?the Galaxy theorythe Big Bang theorythe Steady State theorythe Oscillating theory
Which characteristic is shared by all members of Arthropoda and Chordata phyla?mandiblessimple eyesjointed limbsone pair of wings
Which of the following is certain to change as a ball accelerates?mass of the ballinertia of the ballvelocity of the ballforce acting on the ball
One year a farmer decided not to plant crops in one of his fields. During that year his farm received a greater amount of precipitation than normal. Which will most likely occur in that unplanted field as a result of the greater precipitation?more carbon dioxide will be trapped in the fielderosion of topsoil will increase in the fieldinvasive species will inhabit the fieldanimals will dig burrows in the field
Which group of energy sources are ALL renewable?coal, oil, and natural gassolar, oil, and geothermalwind, solar, and tidalnatural gas, solar, and tidal
What happens to the molecules of a liquid when the liquid cools?They slow down.They speed up.They decrease in numberThey decrease in size
Some individuals are unable to digest the lactose found in the milk of cows. The digestive systems of these individuals most likely lack which?a lipid that coats lactose moleculesan ability to produce lactose internallyan enzyme that catalyzes lactose breakdowna tolerance to lactose developed during childhood
Use the information below to answer the question. The human body is composed of different systems made of specialized cells, tissues, and organs. Each of these structures has a specific function that aids in the survival of the human species. Which organs are used in reproduction?brain, spinal cord, and eyeslungs, esophagus, and heartmouth, stomach, and gallbladderovaries, uterus, and fallopian tubes
Which of the following best describes the relationship between frequency and wavelength of electromagnetic waves?If the frequency remains constant, the wavelength increases.The wavelength decreases as the frequency decreases.The frequency increases as the wavelength decreases.If the wavelength remains constant, the frequency increases.
Which pair would be most necessary for life to develop on another planet?sulfur and nitrogenhelium and hydrogenliquid water and carbonchlorophyll and oxygen
How are light and sound similar?They both travel at the same speed.They are both waves.They are both electromagnetic.They both travel through a vacuum.
When heated, mercuric oxide decomposes to form liquid mercury and oxygen. A scientist heated 10 grams (g) of mercuric oxide and formed 9.3 grams of liquid mercury. How many grams of oxygen were formed?0.7 g9.3 g10.0 g19.3 g
When chlorine gas reacts with sodium metal, what type of substance is formed?A mixtureA compoundAn elementAn alloyA solution
A structure that carries a single unit of hereditary information is agenetissuesex cellpedigree chart
Muscle cells need to quickly convert energy from food molecules into a usable form. For this reason, which of the following do muscle cells have in greater numbers than most other types of cells?chromosomesmitochondrianucleivacuoles
Which would help conserve water?Turn off water while brushing teethWash the car every dayWater the lawn every dayRun the dishwasher after each meal
Which of these are both supplied to Earth by the Sun?coal and oilheat and lightfriction and electricitygravity and magnetism
A red flowered plant (RR) is crossed with a white flowered plant (WW) and produces plants with pink flowers (RW). If two pink flowered plants are crossed, what color offspring could be produced?red, white, and pinkred and whitepink and redpink and white
Which is the most accurate model to show how amino acids form proteins?bees in a hivecars on a trainpetals on a flowerpieces in a jigsaw puzzle
What is the main function of the chloroplasts in plant cells?to produce glucoseto keep the cell rigidto make the cell divideto allow the plant to reproduce
Gravity can be defined as a force of attraction between objects. The effects of gravity can be witnessed in many systems. Which of these actions is an example of gravity influencing other systems?surface water evaporating into the atmosphereplanets moving around the Sun in an elliptical patternglaciers melting because of increasing temperaturesgroundwater moving to the surface in an artesian well
Which characteristic of a cold-water upwelling near the coast of Northern California results in a large concentration of marine organisms?loss of thermal stabilityhigh nutrient concentrationconsistent surface-current flow rateincreased availability of dissolved oxygen
When mountains are formed, there is an interaction between areas of Earth. Which two will interact and result in the formation of mountains?hydrosphere and biospheretroposphere and ionospherehydrosphere and lithosphereasthenosphere and lithosphere
A model of the Moon would be different from a model of Earth in that the Moon shouldbe smaller than Earth.have a source of light inside.have a smoother surface than Earth.have fewer impact craters on the surface.
Which of the following correctly lists the structures in space from smallest to largest?star, galaxy, solar system, universestar, solar system, galaxy, universestar, solar system, universe, galaxystar, universe, solar system, galaxy
Some changes are fast. Some changes are slow. Which of these changes is most likely the slowest?firefloodlandslidedrought
Which of these diseases is caused by a bacterium?rabiesinfluenzastrep throatchicken pox
When is the most energy transferred from the Sun to water in the water cycle?during collectionduring evaporationduring condensationduring precipitation
Which of the following shows the correct sequence of inventions?printing press -> microscope -> telephonetelevision -> automobile -> microwaveairplane -> microphone -> radioDoppler radar -> microphone -> telescope
When two animals live in the same area and depend on the same organism for food, they arecompetingdecomposinggerminatinghibernating
Which statement describes a primary function of the cell wall of a plant cell?The cell wall performs photosynthesis.The cell wall stores DNA.The cell wall provides structural support.The cell wall manufactures proteins.
Which metric units should be used to describe the mass of an object?centimeterslitersgramsdegrees Celsius
Which form of energy is produced when a guitar string vibrates?chemicallightmagneticsound
Andre learned that plants survive through a process called photosynthesis. Which substance do plants produce during photosynthesis?mineralsnitrogensoilsugar
For years, scientists have classified plants according to their characteristics. Which most likely has led scientists to better identify and discover new species of plants?construction of 3-D modelsadvances in the study of DNAunderstanding the process of mitosisdevelopment of the scientific method
Which material best conducts heat and electricity?metalplasticrubberwood
Which two characteristics affect a planet's gravitational attraction to the Sun?mass and volumevolume and length of daydistance from the Sun and masslength of day and distance from the Sun
When a prairie ecosystem was disturbed, an invasive grass species outcompeted the native grass. The new grass had less nutritional value for the organisms living in the area. Which category of organism will be affected by this change first?predatorsherbivoresscavengersdecomposers
In the 1970s, the pesticide DDT was used to kill insects that damaged fruit and vegetable crops. Most insects died from being exposed to DDT, but some survived. These surviving insects contributed to an increase in their population bymigrating to habitats that had different types of crops.learning how to avoid being exposed to DDT.passing the gene for DDT resistance to their offspring.competing with other types of insects for food.
Binary stars orbit around the center of mass of the two stars. What causes the stars to remain together?gravity between the starsenergy released from the starsnuclear reactions in the starsmagnetic attraction between the stars
After a star runs out of most of its hydrogen fuel, it becomes hotter and more luminous. What stage does this represent in the life cycle of a star?quasarprotostarred giantwhite dwarf
How does no-till farming help the environment?It decreases soil erosion.It increases soil removal.It increases fertilizer use.It decreases crop yield.
In a laboratory, a sealed container with 100 g of steam is cooled until all the steam becomes a liquid. The container is then cooled further until all the water becomes a solid. Which of the following remains constant during both of these changes?the mass of the waterthe pressure in the containerthe total energy of the waterthe position of the atoms in the container
A student has decided to investigate whether the number of flowers on a plant will increase if the water supply to the plant is increased. She has five pots of geranium plants to use in her experiment. What factor in the experiment should be varied for the five plants in order to answer the student's question?age of seedlingstemperature of watervolume of waternumber of hours in sunlight
The energy that allows the water cycle to occur comes fromfriction.electricity.the Sun.radioactive decay.
Organisms that are classified as multicellular must haveonly one cell.large cells.more than one cell.identical cells.
Where does air go when a person breathes in?Into the heartInto the stomachInto the lungsInto the liver
Kudzu vines grow by climbing and wrapping around trees. Trees covered by kudzu can die because they are starved of sunlight. What type of relationship exists between the trees and the kudzu growing on them?competitionmutualismparasitismpredator-prey
In the United States, which is responsible for ensuring the safety of the country's drinking water?Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)Food and Drug Administration (FDA)National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)Center for Disease Control (CDC)
A student makes a fruit drink by stirring a powdered mix into cold water. Why is the fruit drink a solution?The powder dissolves in the water.The water changes color.The student stirs the water.The water is the proper temperature.
Which life function is the same for an amoeba as for other freshwater protists?the method used to obtain nutrients and energythe process used to constantly remove excess waterthe method used to detect changes in their environmentthe process used to remove waste products from their cytoplasm
Proxima Centauri is the closest star to the Sun. Which units do astronomers most often use for the distance between Earth and Proxima Centauri?milesmeterslight yearsastronomical units
One positive effect of recycling aluminum cans to manufacture new beverage containers isconserving Earth's resourcescreating acid rainwarming Earth's atmosphereincreasing the ozone layer
Students are conducting an investigation to see how sunlight affects the speed of plant growth. They measure the growth of the plant at the end of two weeks. What would be the best way to communicate the results of this investigation?draw a picturemake some notesmake a chart or graphtell the science teacher
The conservation of matter can be demonstrated by using chemical equations. Which chemical equation demonstrates the conservation of matter?2Sn + 4HNO_{3} -> SnO_{2} + 4NO_{2} + H_{2}OI_{2} + 5Cl_{2} + 6H_{2}O -> 2HIO_{3} + 10HClCl + 4Na -> 4NaCl4P + 5HNO_{3} -> 5NO + 3H_{3}PO_{4}
As the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases, which occurrence is most likely a long-term result?The polar ice caps will melt.Volcanoes will erupt more often.The number of earthquakes will decrease.Rainforests will be unable to support animal life.
Which mineral, found in Arkansas, is an ore that can be used to produce aluminum?quartzgalenabauxitediamond
A summer day begins with a clear, sunny sky. Then, dark clouds form in the afternoon. What type of weather will MOST likely happen next?Sleet and snowRain and thunderWind and snowFog and wind
Eagles have strong, sharp beaks that are most likely adapted for the eagle to eatfish.eggs.worms.flowers.
When a spoon hits a table, it makes a loud sound. When the spoon hits a soft cushion, it does not make a sound. What is the difference between the table and the cushion that accounts for the sound?The table is more reactive than the cushion.The table vibrates more than the cushion.The table is more insulated than the cushion.The table has more potential energy than the cushion.
When Dennis operates his lawnmower, he notices the engine makes a lot of noise. He also notices that the engine gets very hot. Which best describes the heat and noise generated from the lawnmower?a change in phasethermal expansionan increase in entropymechanical advantage
What objects are affected by Earth's gravity?only objects that have massonly objects that sink in wateronly objects that are made of metalonly objects that are heavier than air
Abnormal cell division in humans may result incancerfertilizationasexual reproductiondynamic equilibrium
A donkey and a horse can be bred to produce a mule. Which observation is evidence that donkeys and horses are two different species?They have different body sizes.A mule is not able to reproduce.They are found in different environments.A mule does not resemble either parent.
What should students use to identify the percent chance of a trait being passed down from a parent to its offspring?a grapha flow charta data tablea Punnett square
Which rankings of trees would most likely useful in a scientific study of fruit production in apple trees?date of flowering and the fruit yieldfruit yield and taste of the fruittaste of the fruit and smell of the flowerdate of flowering and smell of the flower
Which of the following characteristics is an acquired trait?heighthair colorlanguageeye shape
Which stimulus causes a responding plant to demonstrate phototropism?intensity of lightdirection of lightlength of daytime of day
Estuaries are marine environments located in areas where fresh water from rivers flow into the ocean. Estuaries are one of the most biologically productive ecosystems. Birds, fish, turtles and many other organisms inhabit these ecosystems. Which will most likely cause changes to estuary habitats on a global scale?decreases in powerful hurricanesdecreases in volcanic eruptionsincreases in earthquakesincreases in sea level
The trunk of a pine tree supports the tree. Which part of a daisy supports the plant the same way?stemflowerrootleaf
What property of electromagnetic waves makes it possible to use these waves to transmit information between a space shuttle and NASA mission control centers on the ground?Electromagnetic waves are transverse waves.Electromagnetic waves have very low velocity.Electromagnetic waves are all visible to human eyes.Electromagnetic waves can travel through a vacuum.
A student is investigating solar energy by cooking food in an oven powered by the Sun. On which of the following days will the food cook most quickly?a warm, rainy daya warm, sunny daya warm, cloudy daya hot, cloudy day
Which is the correct order of the planets from the Sun?Mercury, Venus, Earth, Saturn, Uranus, Jupiter, Mars, NeptuneMercury, Earth, Mars, Venus, Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, UranusMercury, Venus, Mars, Earth, Jupiter, Uranus, Saturn, NeptuneMercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune
Which of these is the basic building block of complex organisms?a cella tissuean organan organ system
Which human response is most likely to occur because the air temperature is 90°F?blinkingsalivatingshiveringsweating
What are the properties of the Earth's crust and mantle that are most responsible for Earth's tectonic activity?They are in different states and have different temperatures.They are in the same state but have different temperatures.They are in different states but have the same temperature.They are the same state and have the same temperature.
When a butterfly emerges from its chrysalis, its wings are crumpled. In order to expand its wings, the butterfly hangs upside down, causing fluid to be pumped into the veins of its wings. This pumping most likely expands the wings byincreasing the pressure inside the wingsdecreasing the density of the wingsincreasing the temperature inside the wingsdecreasing the mass of the wings
Which of the following characteristics will best prevent a tree from being blown over by high winds during a storm?deep rootslong branchesthick barkwide leaves
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have small, free-floating organelles. The cell makes these organelles from nucleic acids and amino acids found in food. Without these organelles, the cell could not make proteins. What are these organelles called?chloroplastsmitochondriaribosomesvesicles
Which temperature is the freezing point of water?0°F32°F50°F100°F
Which statement best describes the molecules in a sample of water that was heated from a liquid to a gas?The average size of the molecules decreased.The average size of the molecules increased.The average kinetic energy of the molecules decreased.The average kinetic energy of the molecules increased.
Constellations are patterns of objects seen in the night sky from Earth. How are the objects in constellations like the Sun?The objects are stars.The objects are planets.The objects are located in this solar system.The objects heat the atmosphere of Earth.
Which is a trait a human most directly inherits from its parents?eye colormusical tastecareer choiceinterest in reading
When observing a very small piece of dust in a liquid under a microscope, the dust appears to jiggle slightly. This movement results from the dust interacting with the molecules in the liquid. What property of the molecules in the liquid causes this effect?The molecules briefly form chemical bonds with nearby objects.The molecules are always in random motion.The molecules transfer an electric charge to the dust particles.The molecules frequently change shape.
Which of the following happens in our solar system?Earth revolves around the sun once per day.The moon revolves around Earth once per day.Earth revolves around the sun once per year.The moon revolves around Earth once per year.
On a cold day, a student felt the tires of her bike before riding it to the store. When she arrived at the store, she felt the tires again and noticed that they were warmer. What caused the temperature of the bicycle tires to change?the wind blowing against the tiresthe air escaping from the spinning tiresthe rubbing between the ground and the tiresthe heat transferring from the rider's hands to the tire
Chloroplasts in cells make it possible for the cells toreproduce.hold their rigid shape.absorb and excrete materials.carry out photosynthesis.
Which of these is the most important product of Virginia forests?Pecan treesPine conesHardwood lumberMaple leaves
Research in which of these areas has the greatest impact on the environment?irradiating foodorganic fertilizersbacteria to clean up oil spillsdeveloping larger, sweeter strawberries
The surface of Earth is covered mostly bysolid rockmolten rockicewater
Which pair of systems is responsible for the flow of blood in the human body?circulatory and skeletal systemsskeletal and excretory systemsmuscular and circulatory systemsrespiratory and muscular systems
Where are the most reactive metals located on the periodic table?the uppermost complete row of the tablethe rows at the bottom of the table connecting two sectionthe column at the far left side of the tablethe second column from the right side of the table
What major and potentially catastrophic events can be predicted to occur in the Northern Hemisphere between the months of June and November?tsunamishurricanesasteroid impactsvolcanic eruptions
The pull of gravity from Earth has the greatest effect oncomets.the Sun.asteroids.the Moon.
What is the main advantage of making a laptop computer light in weight?to make it easy to carryto keep it simple to buildto make the screen easy to readto provide storage for an electrical cord
It takes 365 days forEarth to travel halfway around the Sun.the Moon to travel halfway around Earth.Earth to complete one orbit around the Sun.the Moon to complete one orbit around Earth.
Some scientists once believed that Earth was solid like a marble. Which of these has been most responsible for changes in the scientific view of the structure of Earth?discussions among earth scientists about new datascientific books defining the layers of Eartha lead scientist explaining the structure of Eartha physical model of Earth showing its layers
A student wants to organize a group of animals into two categories based on observable external features. Which display will most appropriately show the two categories of animals?a timelinea pie charta data tablea line graph
Ribosomes present in a particular cell are smaller than those found in plants. In which taxonomic group or groups could the cell be classified?fungi onlyarchaea onlybacteria or archaeabacteria or fungi
What happens to the path of a light ray as it passes from air into water at an angle?Its path widens.Its path bends.Its path becomes shorter.Its path continues in a straight line.
Vibrations in the air caused by hitting a drum formradiation.light.electricity.sound.
As humans grow, their bodies change. Which of these statements explains how humans grow?Cells form a cell wall.Cells increase in size.Cells undergo cell division.Cells merge to become larger.
Which event below involves a constructive force?earthquakevolcanic eruptionfloodwind storm
Which of the following are formed when two crustal plates collide with one another?hot spotsrift valleysmountain rangesmid-ocean ridges
The nucleus contains DNA. Which statement best describes how DNA controls the working of the cell?It codes for proteins.It inhibits division of cells.It helps in energy transformation.It regulates traffic in and out of the cell.
Which of the following provides the best evidence that Earth has evolved over geologic time?coral reefs that slowly changed sizedesert sand dunes that were shaped by windsdeposits of sediment found at the mouth of a riverrock containing fossilized seashells found on a mountaintop
The best explanation of why carnivores are dependent on plants is because theyneed to consume plant matter.use plants for shelter.need carbon dioxide released by plants.consume other animals that eat plants.
In the late 1600s, Anton van Leeuwenhoek began making observations with simple magnifying lenses that he constructed. To which scientific field is Leeuwenhoek credited with the most contributions?plant geneticsdisease controlDNA sequencingmicrobiology
Which section of Earth is composed primarily of liquid metal?crustmantleouter coreinner core
One way humans store energy is by making the molecule glycogen. Clusters of which atoms are rearranged when the body digests plant sugars to make glycogen?hydrogen, nitrogen, carbonoxygen, sulfur, carboncarbon, hydrogen, oxygennitrogen, carbon, sulfur
The number of stars in the Milky Way Galaxy is best estimated asone hundred thousand.one hundred million.one hundred billion.one hundred trillion.
Which type of substances serves as a catalyst for reactions that break large food molecules into smaller useful molecules?enzymesvitaminslipidsnucleotides
What effect does gravity always have on an object on Earth?makes the object movemakes the object stay stillpushes the object upwardpulls the object downward
Which is the best example of a chemical reaction?blocked sunlight casts a shadowsunlight evaporates water from a lakeoxygen absorbs sunlight forming ozone moleculesa prism refracts sunlight into light of different wavelengths
Some one-celled organisms can reproduce by the process ofhormone secretionmetamorphosisfertilizationcell division
One important use of coal is to produce energy for homes. Coal can be burned and converted towind energy.nuclear energy.electrical energy.solar energy.
Which of the following is NOT a mixture?AirBloodOrange juiceSalt
What kind of energy do all moving objects have?Light energySolar energyKinetic energyRenewable energy
In a forest ecosystem, the squirrels eat seeds from trees. The squirrels are then eaten by hawks, owls, and foxes. If there were no more owls present in this ecosystem, which would most likely happen in the forest?The squirrel population would increase.The hawk population would decrease.The fox population would decrease.The tree population would increase.
Which of the following has the greatest direct influence on movement of the lithosphere?the Sunthe MoonEarth's coreEarth's mantle
When humans first began to grow crops, which of these most likely contributed to the extinction of native animal species?pollutionclimate changehabitat destructiontectonic plate motion
Which of these does the MOST harm to the air?Chopping down trees with an ax in the backyardCollecting fall leavesCutting grass with a gas-powered lawnmowerPicking colorful wildflowers along the highway
A scanning electron microscope is best suited for observingdiffraction of light.tectonic features on planets.the surfaces of small objects.topographical features on the ocean floor.
A bird eats a brightly-colored insect that tastes bad. The bird avoids preying on this type of insect again. This example is best described asa physical characteristic.a learned behavior.an inherited behavior.an adaptation.
In winter, the arctic fox has white fur. In summer, its fur changes color to brown and gray. The change in fur color helps the arctic fox to ___.runmatehidehibernate
In which ways are hills most different from mountains?Hills are smaller and more rounded.Hills are deeper and more level.Hills are steeper and rockier.Hills are taller and snowy.
A bird builds a nest tohibernate in wintershelter its offspringproduce more featherseliminate waste
Which statement best describes the motion of the molecules of a solid object?They vibrate in place within a fixed volume.They move around freely within a fixed volume.They vibrate in place and take the shape of a container.They move around freely and take the shape of a container.
What happens when salt water is boiled?The water evaporates and the salt remains in the beaker.Both the salt and the water evaporate and leave the beaker.The salt becomes a new compound.The salt will evaporate from the water and disperse into the environment.
Which set of elements has similar bonding properties?Cl, Br, and FK, Ca, and ScKr, Cl, and OBe, C, and O
Which body system processes foods into a useable source of energy?circulatorydigestivenervousskeletal
What is the best way for a scientist to begin an investigation on a population of deer?typing results into a computerintuitionwriting facts in a field notebookobserving the deer in their own habitat
Which property of an object describes how easily electricity travels through it?colortemperaturereflectivityconductivity
Which is a statement of fact?The Sun is very pretty.The Sun is fun to study.The Sun is larger than Earth.The Sun is more interesting than the Moon.
Sydney is learning about the sources of energy that can run out. Which energy source will run out the fastest?flowing waternatural gassunlightwind
The first organisms to occupy an area after a prairie fire are known asprimary species.secondary species.succession species.pioneer species.
Which of the following is caused by a virus?ulcermalariatuberculosisinfluenza
When a beam of light passes through a clear, convex lens, the light will mostlydiffract and spread out.diffract and come to a focal point.refract and come to a focal point.refract and spread out.
The symptoms of strep throat infection are a red and swollen throat. What is the most likely cause of strep throat?eating raw vegetablesdrinking lemonadeinvading bacteriarunning in cold weather
Compared to the particles in a hardened lava sample, the particles in a liquid lava samplehave a lower temperaturehave less kinetic energyare moving fasterare closer together
Which characteristic do both the Moon and Earth share?They both have rocky surfaces.They both have active volcanoes.They both have similar atmospheres.They both have the same gravitational pull.
Which would be the most likely effect of a large decrease in the number of woodpeckers in a forest?Temperatures would increase.Precipitation would increase.The number of trees in the forest would increase.The insect population in the forest would increase.
Which two life processes occur in both plants and humans?growing and reproducinggerminating and making foodgrowing and making foodgerminating and reproducing
In order for Galileo to build a telescope, he needed to know aboutlenses.metals.chemical mixtures.the making of leather.
A birdwatcher wants to identify an eastern bluebird. What feature of a bird should the birdwatcher evaluate first to identify an eastern bluebird?beak shapeeye positionfeather patterntail-feather length
When a neutral atom gains or loses electrons, it becomesmore stable.an isotope.an ion.less charged.
Which is an effect of regular exercise?weaker bonesless energybetter hearingstronger heart
A light year is used to measuretime.distance.luminosity.temperature.
As an object falls, air resistance gradually increases until it is equal with the pull of gravity. This effect is calledfinal velocity.initial velocity.escape velocity.terminal velocity.
All of these elements are metals exceptgold.helium.sodium.aluminum.
Observation and measurement are important to scientific investigations becausethey are part of the instructions.they are used to test a hypothesis.they are required to make a hypothesis.they keep you safe during an investigation.
When air rises over the open ocean, a low pressure system is formed. Which factor increases the potential of a low pressure system developing into a hurricane in the Northern Hemisphere?cool ocean currents circulating towards the equatorincreased volcanic activity in the upper latitudescold air moving south from the North Polewarm water temperatures in the tropics
Imprints of the shells of ocean clams are often found in the rocks of the Appalachian Mountains. What do these imprint fossils most likely indicate?These mountains were once under the ocean.These mountains once had a more rainy climate.Mountain river clams evolved from ocean clams.Ocean clams evolved from mountain river clams.
A population of ground squirrels has established a community in the grasslands of the Great Plains. Temperatures often reach -15°C for most of the winter. What is the most likely behavior the ground squirrels use to survive these winter temperatures?burrowing below the frost point of the soil surfaceburrowing in tree trunks above the soil surfaceconsuming roots found under the soil surfaceconsuming organisms found in the soil surface
Which is the lowest level of environmental organization that would include the water quality and air temperature in an area?biomeecosystemcommunitypopulation
When you bend your arm at the elbow, the bones and muscles in your arm are acting as a system. What simple machine does this system represent?Inclined planePulleyWedgeLever
A student places a pan of water on the stove. What happens to some of the water as it is heated to a boil?It becomes a gas.It becomes a solid.It gets new atomic bonds.It gets destroyed.
What are the parts that make up an atom?electrons, neutrons, and protonselectrons, protons, and gamma raysneutrons, photons, and beta particlesneutrons, protons, and alpha particles
One end of a metal rod is placed over a flame during an investigation. A thermometer is touching the opposite end of the metal rod. Which best describes what is happening during this investigation?Convection carries heat to the thermometer.Radiant energy warms the thermometer.Mechanical energy from the flame carries heat to the thermometer.Heat from the flame is conducted through the metal rod to the thermometer.
Mountains are most likely formedwhen glaciers melt.from earthquakes.when land sinks.along tectonic plates.
Read the information about Alice's science project then answer the question. Alice needed to design a science project. She decided that she wanted to focus her project on how an earthworm's behavior helps it survive. Alice wrote down four ideas about earthworm behavior that she wanted to test. Which idea can be tested experimentally?Earthworms like the taste of dirt better than sand.Earthworms are happier in black dirt than red dirt.Earthworms exist to decompose decaying materials.Earthworms will move away from direct light sources.
What do the elements sulfur (S), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and bromine (Br) have in common?They are noble (inert) gases.They are nonmetals.They have the same thermal conductivity.They have the same number of protons.
Tissue plasminogen activator is a natural blood thinner. The coded sequence for the blood thinner is called PLAT , found on chromosome 8. It is used to treat people who have heart attacks and strokes. Tissue plasminogen activator can be made through genetic engineering. What is tissue plasminogen activator?a genea proteina plateleta DNA molecule
Which of these groups contains only metric measurements?inches, grams, ouncesinches, pounds, ouncescentimeters, grams, milliliterscentimeters, pounds, milliliters
Scientists use large optical telescopes to obtain information about the planets in the solar system. What wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation provide this information?gamma radiationinfrared radiationradio wavesvisible light
Which scientist is credited for the development of the polio vaccine?Jonas SalkNeil ArmstrongAlbert EinsteinJacques Cousteau
When a volcano erupts, new lava is deposited on the slopes of the volcano. After the lava cools and hardens, which types of organisms will most likely be the first to live on the new material?large reptiles and amphibianssmall birds and mammalsmosses and lichensbushes and vines
Ella waves good-bye from the bus. What body system pulls on bones to let Ella wave her arm?muscular systemnervous systemdigestive systemcirculatory system
Coral reefs are found in shallow tropical ocean waters. A coral reef is a diverse ecosystem that is supported by the photosynthesis of marine plants and the algae that live within the tissues of the coral. Given this information, when would the waters in a coral reef likely have the highest dissolved oxygen concentration?7 a.m.2 p.m.9 p.m.midnight
What keeps the planets in orbit around the Sun?tidesgravityelectricitymagnetism
As seen from Earth, the appearance of the Moon changes throughout the month. What causes the appearance of the Moon to change?Earth rotating on its axisthe Moon rotating on its axisEarth revolving around the Sunthe Moon revolving around Earth
In producing an automobile, which of the 27 following is the best use of a robot?to perform repetitive tasksto determine the trunk spaceto demonstrate passenger comfortto perform quality control inspections
The Theory of Plate Tectonics is based onevidence of sea floor spreading.topographic mapping of mountain ranges.an analysis of soil at the plate boundaries.volcanic activity along coastlines.
Which of the following must all plant and animal species do in order for each species to survive?migratereproducemake foodchange color
Which activity illustrates the main function of the motor neuron complex?transferring impulses to the appropriate musclereceiving sensory impulses from the environmentdelivering regular impulses to the autonomic systemprocessing impulses within the cerebral cortex
Nutrients are recycled when materials decompose in an ecosystem. Which is the best example of the decomposition process where organic material is recycled in an ecosystem?a hawk eating a mouseworms tunneling through soilbacteria feeding on dead plantsa plant using nitrogen to make proteins
What is one function of tree roots?to absorb sunlightto absorb waterto make seedsto make food
Food contains stored chemical energy. Which units of measurement can be used to compare the amounts of energy in different foods?caloriesdecibelsnewtonswatts
The freezing and expanding of water in the cracks of rocks is a form ofweathering.deposition.faulting.erosion.
Which of the following is a way that everyone can help with conservation efforts?camp in the woodsuse biodegradable materialsvisit a landfilluse disposable plates
Historically, how has the compass been used?for navigationto predict weatherto measure temperaturefor mineral identification
A cut to the skin is treated with antiseptic first to avoidan immune response.a bacterial infection.bruising of tissues.an allergic reaction.
Which would be a safe practice to exercise during laboratory investigations?using open flames to heat all materialskeeping your cell phone on the laboratory countertopknowing where your instructor/laboratory leader is at all timesremoving your safety glasses when moving from station to station
The shape of the moon appears to change regularly during each month. Which of the following best explains why the shape of the moon appears to change?The Earth turns on its axis.The Moon turns on its axis.The Moon orbits around the Earth.Clouds cover the Moon.
How do the nutrients necessary for plant growth get into the soil?The soil absorbs sunlight.Water filters through the soil.Organic matter is decayed in the soil.The soil is exposed to air.
Which part of a sunflower plant absorbs water and nutrients?RootsStemsLeavesFlowers
